15314655	Hematopoiesis is precisely orchestrated by lineage-specific DNA-binding proteins that regulate transcription in concert with coactivators and corepressors. Mutations in the zebrafish moonshine (mon) gene specifically disrupt both embryonic and adult hematopoiesis, resulting in severe red blood <andsystem-candidate> aplasia. We report that mon encodes the zebrafish ortholog of mammalian transcriptional intermediary factor 1γ (TIF1γ) (or TRIM33), a member of the TIF1 family of coactivators and corepressors. During development, hematopoietic progenitor cells in mon mutants fail to express normal levels of hematopoietic transcription factors, including gata1, and undergo apoptosis. Three different mon mutant alleles each encode premature stop codons, and enforced expression of wild-type tif1γ mRNA rescues embryonic hematopoiesis in homozygous mon mutants. Surprisingly, a high level of zygotic tif1γ mRNA expression delineates ventral mesoderm during hematopoietic stem cell and progenitor formation prior to gata1 expression. Transplantation studies reveal that tif1γ functions in a cell-autonomous manner during the differentiation of erythroid precursors. Studies in murine erythroid cell lines demonstrate that Tif1γ protein is localized within novel nuclear foci, and expression decreases during erythroid cell maturation. Our results establish a major role for this transcriptional intermediary factor in the differentiation of hematopoietic cells in vertebrates.
15314655	Hematopoiesis involves the coordinated processes of <andsystem-candidate> proliferation and differentiation of a relatively small number of progenitor cells into billions of circulating red and white blood cells (Thisse and Zon 2002). Hematopoiesis in vertebrates, from zebrafish to humans, is an evolutionarily conserved program that produces two waves of stem or progenitor cells that differ both in their embryonic origins and in the lineages of differentiated blood cells produced (Palis and Yoder 2001; Orkin and Zon 2002; Galloway and Zon 2003). The first, or primitive, wave of hematopoiesis originates from ventral mesoderm and gives rise to progenitor cells that differentiate in embryonic blood islands. The primitive wave of hematopoiesis produces a burst of embryonic erythrocytes and macrophages. The second, or definitive, wave of hematopoiesis arises from self-renewing stem cells that develop primarily in the intraembryonic aorta–gonad–mesonephros region. These definitive hematopoietic stem cells seed the later developing marrow spaces, to produce all lineages of adult blood cells, including definitive erythrocytes, myeloid cells, and lymphocytes.
15314655	Our studies establish that tif1γ functions as an essential regulator of embryonic and adult hematopoiesis in vertebrates. <andsystem-candidate> transplantation studies demonstrate that tif1γ acts in a cell-autonomous manner during embryonic hematopoiesis. The tif1γ gene is expressed specifically in ventral mesoderm and hematopoietic progenitors, then downregulated as erythroid maturation occurs. Tif1γ protein localizes to a novel class of nuclear bodies in both primary mouse embryo fibroblasts and erythroleukemia cell lines. Taken together, our studies demonstrate that Tif1γ is required for normal erythroid cell development and survival.
15314655	Our studies establish that tif1γ functions as an essential regulator of embryonic and adult hematopoiesis in vertebrates. Cell transplantation studies demonstrate that tif1γ acts in a <andsystem-candidate>-autonomous manner during embryonic hematopoiesis. The tif1γ gene is expressed specifically in ventral mesoderm and hematopoietic progenitors, then downregulated as erythroid maturation occurs. Tif1γ protein localizes to a novel class of nuclear bodies in both primary mouse embryo fibroblasts and erythroleukemia cell lines. Taken together, our studies demonstrate that Tif1γ is required for normal erythroid cell development and survival.
15314655	In order to determine when the mon gene is required in development, we first examined hematopoietic gene expression and apoptosis in zebrafish homozygous mon mutant embryos. During embryogenesis, homozygous zebrafish mon mutants have no red blood cells (RBCs) visible in circulation (Ransom et al. 1996; Weinstein et al. 1996). The mon mutants initiate expression of gata1 in hematopoietic cells around the five-somite stage, similar to wild-type embryos (data not shown); however, based on TUNEL staining, the differentiating erythroid cells undergo programmed <andsystem-candidate> death from the 12-somite stage to 22 h postfertilization (hpf) (Figure 1A and 1B, arrows). At 12 somites, gata1 expression is only slightly reduced. By 18–22 hpf, hematopoietic-specific markers such as gata1, scl, gata2, and ikaros are not detected in the embryonic blood island (Figure 1A and 1B; unpublished data). The hematopoietic cells are thus correctly specified early during the development of mon mutant embryos, but these precursors undergo cell death. Based on expression of c-myb and rag1 (Figure 1B, arrows), mon mutants have normal myeloid and lymphoid development, respectively. In addition to the deficit of RBCs in mon mutants, there is a prominent loss of fin-fold and tail mesenchyme (Ransom et al. 1996). TUNEL staining of mon mutants demonstrates extensive apoptosis of mesenchymal cells in the trunk and tail bud regions (Figure 1A and 1B, arrows). The mon gene is thus required for normal development and survival of both committed erythroid progenitor cells and posterior mesenchymal cells.
15314655	In order to determine whether tif1γ is expressed in hematopoietic mesoderm, we next examined zebrafish embryos by whole-mount in situ hybridization (Figure 4A). tif1γ mRNA is expressed maternally and is found throughout the embryo during blastula stages. During gastrulation and epiboly stages, zygotic expression of mon is highest in the mesendoderm of the germ ring. At tail bud and early somite stages a high level of tif1γ expression delineates a horseshoe-shaped population of ventral/lateral mesoderm that will give rise to blood and also expresses stem <andsystem-candidate> leukemiahematopoietic transcription factor (scl) (Liao et al. 1997). This group of cells continues to express tif1γ and scl while it converges and forms the embryonic blood island (Detrich et al. 1995). The tif1γ gene is also highly expressed in the central nervous system as well as the mesenchyme of the trunk and tail. Homozygous montg234 mutants have a greatly reduced amount of tif1γ mRNA in all tissues consistent with nonsense-mediated message decay. Thus, zebrafish tif1γ is specifically expressed in ventral mesoderm and putative hemangioblasts prior to and during the embryonic stages when hematopoietic progenitors are undergoing apoptosis in mon mutants. We also compared the expression of zebrafish mon to mouse Tif1γ (Figure 4A and 4B). Mouse Tif1γ is highly expressed in erythroid blood islands of the yolk sac, and it is subsequently expressed in the fetal liver at a high level, and in other tissues, including the central nervous system. Taken together these results strongly suggest that zebrafish mon and mouse Tif1γ are orthologs that function during hematopoiesis.
15314655	To further confirm that a mutation in the zebrafish tif1γ gene is responsible for the mon mutant phenotype we performed embryo rescue experiments (Figure 5A; Table 1). Microinjection of synthetic wild-type mon mRNA at the one-<andsystem-candidate> stage rescues the formation of embryonic erythrocytes in genotyped mutant embryos without causing obvious defects in embryonic patterning or organogenesis. At 4 d of development, 70% (n = 10) of montg234 mutants show significant (greater than 200 cells in comparison to a wild-type estimate of 3,000 cells) rescue of circulating hemoglobinized RBCs in comparison to control sibling mutants (n = 75). Based on the correction of the jagged fin-fold phenotype (Ransom et al. 1996), the mesenchymal cells are rescued to a similar extent as the anemia (unpublished data). Overexpression of mon did not result in expanded blood cell numbers in wild-type embryos and was not toxic at doses that rescue the phenotype of mon mutants (unpublished data). Since there were no expanded or ectopic blood populations in the embryos, these rescue experiments suggest that mon functions as a permissive factor required for hematopoiesis.
15314655	The high levels of tif1γ expression in erythroid cells suggest that it functions as a <andsystem-candidate>-autonomous regulator of gene expression in hematopoietic cells. In order to test this hypothesis, we transplanted wild-type adult zebrafish kidney marrow cells carrying a gata1:green fluorescent protein (GFP) transgene into 48-hpf mon mutant embryos (Figure 5B; Table 2). The gata1:GFP transgene makes use of the gata1 promoter to drive GFP expression and can thus be used to mark donor-derived erythroid cells (Long et al. 1997). Untransplanted mutant embryos have no embryonic blood cells in circulation. Following transplantation, mutant host embryos were observed daily for 2 wk. Of 191 mutant embryos injected, 129 (68%) showed GFP+ cells in circulation 2 d later. Many recipients showed robust increases in donor-derived cells over the observation period. Of 81 recipients initially scored as having less than ten GFP+ cells at day 2 posttransplant, 13 (16%) of these demonstrated a marked increase in erythroid cells with 100–1,000 GFP+ cells in circulation 6 d later. By day 10, these transplanted embryos showed approximately 3,000 cells in circulation, similar to the number of blood cells in normal embryos. Despite robust reconstitution of blood cells, mutant recipients did not inflate their swim bladders and thus failed to survive longer than nontransplanted sibling controls, all dying by 3 wk of age. In contrast, 13/35 (37%) heterozygous montg234 transplants survived to early adulthood. Similar transplants of wild-type cells can fully rescue vlad tepes (gata1) mutants (Traver et al. 2003). Therefore, the results of cell transplantations suggests that tif1γ plays a cell-autonomous role in erythroid cells, and its role in nonhematopoietic tissues, such as trunk mesenchyme or the nervous system, is also required for embryo survival.
15314655	In order to examine the subcellular distribution of Tif1γ protein, we generated an affinity-purified rabbit polyclonal antiserum directed against the C-terminal 15 amino acids conserved in human TIF1γ and mouse Tif1γ. Immunofluorescence of mouse embryo fibroblast nuclei with the anti-Tif1γ antiserum demonstrates that Tif1γ is localized in small nuclear foci (Figure 6A). The localization of Tif1γ protein appears different from the more diffuse nuclear patterns typically seen in studies of Tif1α (Remboutsika et al. 2002) or TIF1β (Cammas et al. 2002). A recent report demonstrates that TIF1β associates with heterochromatin-containing foci after retinoic acid treatment or serum starvation (Cammas et al. 2002). Thus, localization or expression of the TIF1 proteins may be regulated during distinct developmental processes or by environmental cues. The nuclear foci that contain Tif1γ do not colocalize with two markers of heterochromatin, HP1α protein and DAPI staining of DNA (Figure 6A). Furthermore, Tif1γ does not colocalize with promyelocytic leukemia gene product (PML) nuclear bodies, DNA repair complexes that contain Mre11, or transcriptional complexes containing TFII-B (unpublished data). We next examined the expression of Tif1γ protein during the differentiation of G1E cells, a murine erythroleukemia <andsystem-candidate> line that can terminally differentiate into erythrocytes when a Gata1:estrogen receptor fusion protein is stabilized in response to estrogen exposure (Weiss et al. 1997). Western blot analysis demonstrated that Tif1γ protein expression decreases with terminal erythroid differentiation (Figure 6B). Consistent with this finding, after 24 hpf, zebrafish mon mRNA expression falls during the terminal maturation of the primitive erythroid cells (unpublished data). In two different murine erythroleukemia cell lines (MEL and G1E), Tif1γ is also expressed in nuclear foci, and even though the overall Tif1γ protein level is reduced, this nuclear foci localization does not change with differentiation (unpublished data). This provides further support for the hypothesis that Tif1γ acts within novel nuclear foci, during erythroid differentiation.
15314655	Our examination of hematopoietic gene expression, apoptosis, and marrow histology in mon mutants demonstrates that early erythroid progenitors are formed in homozygous mutants, but they fail to properly differentiate and instead undergo programmed <andsystem-candidate> death (see Figure 1). The expression of gata1 appears to initiate normally in the committed erythroid cells of mon mutants. However, the cells are abnormal prior to the complete loss of gata1 expression. TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells are abundant by the 12-somite stage of development, and by 22 hpf all hematopoietic gene expression is extinguished. The expression of marker genes, including scl and gata2, characteristic of hematopoietic stem cells and primitive hematopoietic progenitors, are also not detected in the embryonic blood islands of mutants at 22 hpf. This indicates that the mutant hematopoietic cells are not blocked prior to commitment to the erythroid lineage, but instead develop as abnormal erythroid cells and undergo apoptosis, similar to gata1-deficient erythroid cells (Fujiwara et al. 1996; Lyons et al. 2002). Defective erythropoiesis and severe anemia were also observed in rare surviving homozygous mutant mon adults, demonstrating that tif1γ is also required in definitive hematopoiesis (see Figure 2).
15314655	Taken together, our data suggest that tif1γ is required as a permissive cofactor for the erythroid lineage-specific control of hematopoietic gene expression. We reasonably predict that Tif1γ protein functions as a transcriptional intermediary factor in hematopoietic progenitor cells given that both TIF1α (Zhong et al. 1999) and TIF1β (Friedman et al. 1996; Abrink et al. 2001) have been shown to act as intermediary factors that positively or negatively regulate gene transcription. These studies indicate that TIF1α and TIF1β act as scaffolds that link different classes of DNA-binding proteins and chromatin-associated proteins into larger regulatory complexes. Tif1γ is detected within nuclear foci (see Figure 6), which, based on our analysis, do not appear to correspond to several types of previously described nuclear bodies, including PML bodies. Localization of Tif1γ to these nuclear bodies may be regulated by posttranslational modification such as SUMO modification that is required for PML to form PML nuclear domains (Zhong et al. 2000a, 2000b; Best et al. 2002). These foci may serve as assembly points where Tif1γ forms multisubunit complexes with DNA-binding transcription factors and their other essential coactivators or corepressors, during the early stages of erythroid differentiation. It will be important to determine the identity of Tif1γ-interacting proteins in nuclear foci and establish how they function with Tif1γ to regulate blood <andsystem-candidate> development.
15314655	Antisera against the human C-terminal TIF1γ sequence RRKRLKSDERPVHIK was generated in rabbits (Genemed Synthesis, South San Francisco, California, United States) and affinity purified. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts grown on coverslips were immunostained with HP1α (Chemicon, Temecula, California, United States) and Tif1γ antisera simultaneously. In brief, cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 5 min, washed with phosphate-buffered saline, and blocked with 5% serum (PBST) for 30 min. After incubation with the primary antibodies (PBST, 60 min) cells were washed three times with PBST and incubated with secondary antibodies (Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, United States) followed by three washes in PBST. Cells were embedded with Vectashield/DAPI and analyzed using an Axioplan 2 microscope (Zeiss, Jena, Germany). Digital images were processed using the Volocity 1.0 software (Improvision, Lexington, Massachusetts, United States). G1E <andsystem-candidate> differentiation experiments were performed essentially as described (Weiss et al. 1997).
15314655	(A) Deconvolved immunofluorescence images of a mouse embryonic fibroblast <andsystem-candidate> nucleus stained with an anti-Tif1γ antibody and stained with a monoclonal antibody directed against HP1α. This is also compared to DAPI staining. The merged images of the nucleus show that Tif1γ does not colocalize with the HP1α or DAPI staining of heterochromatin while HP1α and DAPI staining overlap.
15314655	Synthetic tif1γ mRNA (100 pg) was injected at the one-<andsystem-candidate> stage into embryos of the indicated genotypes. For the mon embryos, circulating cells where counted each day through 4 d, when the embryos were fixed and stained with o-dianisidine to detect hemoglobin in mature RBCs. Normal embryos contain approximately 3,000 circulating cells at these time points. Results are given as number of embryos with the indicated phenotype. Numbers in parentheses represent percentage of total embryos analyzed
12546709	A much broader scope of cellular functions of alpha-crystallin in lens is inferred from in vitro observations. Both alphaA and alphaB can bind specifically to actin, in vitro [13] and in vivo [14]. Although actin filament formation has been shown to be necessary for differentiation of lens epithelial cells [15], the significance of alpha-crystallin's interaction with actin in differentiation is not known. In the lens, alpha-crystallin also associates with type III intermediate filament proteins and the beaded filament proteins CP49 and CP115, and correct beaded filament assembly has been shown depend on the presence of alpha-crystallin [16]. Beaded filament mRNA levels are greatly increased in differentiating lens epithelium and have been suggested as a pan-specific marker for lens fiber development [17]. Alpha-crystallin has also been shown to interact directly with DNA [18]. In transfected CHO cells, alphaB has also been shown to ectopically localize to interphase nuclei, suggesting a role for this protein in the nucleus [19]. A nuclear role for alphaB in the lens was supported by the findings that a subset of lens epithelial cells derived from alphaB knockout mice demonstrated hyperproliferation and genomic instability [20]. In addition, the administration of exogenous alpha-crystallin to primary bovine lens epithelial <andsystem-candidate> cultures resulted in the formation of lentoid bodies, consistent with a role for these proteins in lens differentiation [21]. These findings indicate that alpha-crystallin may have a multitude of in vivo functions.
12546709	One approach to resolving some of the in vivo functions of alpha-crystallin is to generate animal models where one or both of the alpha-crystallin gene products have been eliminated. Brady et al. [22] demonstrated, by targeted disruption of the mouse alphaA gene, that this protein was essential for the maintenance of lens transparency, possibly by maintaining the solubility of alphaB, or associated proteins, in the lens. These lenses were also reported to be smaller in equatorial and light axial dimensions than age matched wild type lens. It was not possible using the techniques employed in the study to determine if the smaller lenses were due to reduced volume or number of fiber cells. Targeted disruption of the mouse alphaB gene resulted in lenses similar in size to aged-matched wild type lens. Moreover, no cataract formation was observed in the alphaB knockout lenses. These animals have muscle <andsystem-candidate> abnormalities, severe postural anomalies, selective muscle degeneration, and shorter life spans compared to normal controls [23].
12546709	In the single alpha-crystallin knockout mice, the remaining alpha-crystallin may fully or partially compensate for some of the functions of the missing protein, especially in the lens, where both alphaA and alphaB are normally expressed at high levels. The objectives of the current report were to characterize gross morphology of young (5 wk) and old (54 wk) mouse lenses with targeted disruption of both the alphaA and alphaB genes, in comparison to age matched wild type lenses, using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and confocal microscopy, to elucidate the possible functions of alpha-crystallin in the lens. The results indicate that alpha-crystallin is necessary for proper fiber <andsystem-candidate> formation and resulting lens transparency.
12546709	Examination of mid-axial sections stained with DiI and SYTOX green revealed unique differences in gross morphology and nucleic acid staining between alphaA/BKO lenses and wild type lenses (Figure 2). In five week old alphaA/BKO lenses, Sytox green stained nuclei (green) in the anterior epithelium, equatorial/bow, and posterior subcapsular regions (Figure 2A). <andsystem-candidate> nuclei localized to the equatorial/bow region were disorganized as compared to wild type. There were enlarged extracellular spaces between cells in the equatorial/bow region in 5 wk old alphaA/BKO lenses. Fifty-four wk old alphaA/BKO lenses (Figure 2B) did not stain for nucleic acid in the posterior subcapsular region, however, the entire anterior subcapsular lens region stained for nucleic acid (refer to Figure 3I for high magnification/resolution image of this area). A defined equatorial/bow region was not observed in these older lenses, and fiber cells extending to the posterior capsule of the lens were not found. Disorganized cellular material capped the anterior region of the embryonic/fetal nucleus, and a distinctive indentation of the lens mass at the equatorial region was apparent in mid-axial sections as well as whole lenses. In alphaA/BKO lenses the embryonic/fetal nucleus (primary lens fibers) had migrated posteriorly and appeared to be in contact with the posterior capsule. In 5 wk, 46 wk or 72 wk old wild type lenses (Figure 2C,2D and 2E), however, there was no posterior or anterior subcapsular nucleic acid staining and the embryonic-fetal nucleus was centrally located, not in contact with the posterior capsule.
12546709	Ultrastructural differences at the equatorial/bow region were also observed between alphaA/BKO lenses (Figure 3B and 3G) and wild type lenses (Figure 3L and 3Q). In contrast to wild type lenses (Figure 3L and 3Q), the alphaA/BKO lenses (Figure 3B and 3G) contained large areas devoid of cellular material, their nuclei were not limited to a well defined equatorial/bow region, and ordered radial columns of elongating fiber cells extending from the posterior capsule to the anterior epithelium were not observed. In addition to the equatorial region, ultrastructural differences between alphaA/BKO lenses (Figure 3C and 3H) and wild type lenses (Figure 3M and 3R) were observed in fiber cells of the embryonic and fetal nucleus. In 5 wk alphaA/BKO lenses (Figure 3C), a greater variation in cross sectional diameter was observed, with <andsystem-candidate> diameters ranging from less than 2 microns up to approximately 25 microns, compared to the 5 wk and 46 wk wild type lenses, whose diameters ranged from less than 2 microns up to approximately 10 microns (Figure 3M and 3R). At 54 wk, these cells in the alphaA/BKO lenses were larger in cross sectional diameter than wild type, and exhibited a much greater variation in the cross sectional size and cell shape.
12546709	SEM confirmed many of the observations made by confocal microscopy. In the equatorial/bow region, a disorganized array of relatively small irregular shaped cells were observed in 5 wk (Figure 4A) and 54 wk (Figure 4D) alphaA/BKO lenses, while elongated fiber cells organized into radial columns, with ball and socket interdigitations, were observed in 5 wk (Figure 4G), 46 wk (Figure 4J) and 72 wk (data not shown) wild type lenses. In the anterior cortical region of 5 wk alphaA/BKO lenses, radial columns of cells with numerous <andsystem-candidate> surface projections were observed (Figure 4B), but these radial columns were no longer present at 54 weeks of age (Figure 4E). In these older lenses, irregularly shaped, convoluted cells, with no recognizable pattern of organization, were present. In contrast, radial columns of elongated fiber cells of uniform size and shape, with ball and socket interdigitations, were present in the anterior cortical region of 5 wk (Figure 4H), 46 wk (Figure 4K) and 72 week (data not shown) wild type lenses. The posterior subcapsular regions of 5 wk (Figure 4C) and 54 wk (Figure 4F) alphaA/BKO lenses were filled with irregularly shaped cells with numerous cell surface projections. In the fetal/embryonic nucleus, elongated fiber cells with numerous long, finger-like projections and furrowed membranes were evident (not shown). No elongated cells extending from the bow region to the posterior capsule of alphaA/BKO lenses were observed. In contrast, radial columns of elongated fiber cells of uniform size and shape containing ball and socket interdigitations were observed in the posterior subcapsular region in 5 wk (Figure 4I), 46 wk (Figure 4L) and 72 wk (data not shown) wild type lenses, and fiber cells in contact with the posterior capsule could be traced back to the equatorial bow region and anterior epithelium.
12546709	The results of the current study support the hypothesis that alpha-crystallin plays an active role in the differentiation and growth of lens fiber cells. Normal differentiation of lens fiber cells consists of a progression from a simple cuboidal epithelial <andsystem-candidate>, containing a nucleus and a minimal numbers of organelles, to a stratified layer of elongated fiber-like cells, devoid of nuclei and organelles. Differentiation of epithelial cells occurs in the equatorial/bow region of the lens, where epithelial cells begin to elongate and differentiate into fiber cells of uniform cellular shape, arranged in radial columns of cells extending from the anterior epithelium to the posterior capsule. This process did not appear to have proceeded normally in lenses lacking alphaA and alphaB. The morphological observations presented in this study demonstrate that fiber cells in lenses lacking alphaA and alphaB fail to elongate symmetrically from the bow region and therefore do not establish the typical "onion skin" conformation in which cells extend from the anterior epithelium to the posterior capsule. Additionally, in lenses from 54 wk alphaA/BKO lenses, there was a persistence of cell nuclei in deeper cortical regions, and ectopic cell nuclei were present in large numbers in the anterior central cortex. At 5 wks of age cell nuclei were present, adjacent to the posterior capsule. These morphological observations are consistent with a defect in the normal differentiation pathway of lens epithelial cells into fiber cells.
12546709	The final biological event in a lens epithelial <andsystem-candidate>'s life is the transformation from an epithelial cell into a fiber cell, which occurs at the equatorial/bow region of the lens. The newly forming fiber cell continues to differentiate in the cortex until a mature fiber cell devoid of organelles with suture formation at the ends of the cell is formed. This entire process from epithelial cell to mature fiber cell is defined as lens differentiation. The precise spatial and temporal expression of the crystallin proteins in the developing lens may not be simply a consequence of the differentiation process, but instead may play an important, if not essential, role in the differentiation process itself. The results of the current study support this hypothesis.
12546709	The exact in vivo molecular mechanisms, by which alpha-crystallin might influence lens epithelial <andsystem-candidate> differentiation, and maintenance of lens transparency, remain to be determined. AlphaA and alphaB are members of the shsp family [7]. Previous studies have shown that the alpha-crystallin possesses molecular chaperone activity, binding to partially denatured proteins, both in vitro [5] and probably in vivo [6], to inhibit further denaturation. Although this property may be a major contributor to the maintenance of lens clarity, the early changes in the alphaA/BKO lenses indicate a much broader cellular function for alpha-crystallin. Stress proteins have been shown to be expressed in non-stressed cells during development and differentiation [25]. Hsps were shown to be expressed during the differentiation of mammalian osteoblasts and promelocytic leukemia cells [26]. In addition, hsp expression has been shown to accompany growth arrest in human B lymphocytes [27] and macrophage differentiation of HL 60 cells [28]. During myogenic differentiation, mRNA for alphaB increases in conjunction with the induction of mRNA for myogenin, the earliest known event in myogenesis [29]. The addition of exogenous alpha-crystallin to primary bovine lens epithelium was shown to induce rapid changes in cell shape, leading to the formation of lentoid bodies [21]. These studies strongly suggest that the hsp family of proteins has other functions in addition to protecting proteins and cells during stress.
12546709	Alpha-crystallin may play a functional role in the <andsystem-candidate> nucleus and may have a role in regulating the cell cycle. Several heat shock proteins have been found in cell nuclei in the absence of stress [30], and alpha-crystallin has been shown to interact directly with DNA [18]. AlphaB, expressed in transfected CHO cells, has been shown to ectopically localize to interphase nuclei, suggesting a regulatory role for this protein in the nucleus [19]. A subset of immortalized lens epithelial cells from alphaBKO mice have been shown to hyperproliferate [20] suggesting that alphaB may be important in maintaining genomic stability. In lens epithelium derived from alphaAKO lenses, cell growth rates were reported to be 50% lower compared to wild type [31], suggesting a role for alphaA in regulating the cell cycle. All of these findings raise many questions as to the possible role(s) of alpha-crystallin in the nucleus and in cell cycle regulation during differentiation. In the current study, the observation of a disorganized pattern of nuclei localized to the equatorial bow region of alphaA/BKO lenses, and nucleic acid staining of structures throughout the anterior cortex of 54 wk alphaA/BKO lenses, is consistent with a role for alpha-crystallin in the nucleus.
12546709	There is extensive evidence from previous studies demonstrating that alpha-crystallin plays a role in the cytoskeletal organization. Both alphaA and alphaB can bind specifically to actin, both in vitro [13] and in vivo [14]. Actin filament formation has been shown to be necessary for the differentiation of lens epithelial cells [15], however, the significance of alpha-crystallin interaction with actin in differentiation is not known. In the lens, alpha-crystallin also forms a complex with type III intermediate filament proteins and the lens-specific beaded filament proteins CP49 and CP115, which may be critical for proper filament assembly [16]. Beaded filament mRNA levels increase greatly in differentiating lens epithelial cells, and have been suggested as a pan-specific marker for lens fiber cells [17]. It is therefore possible that increased synthesis of alpha-crystallin in epithelial cells early in the differentiation process may have profound effects upon the cytoskeleton, which in turn may profoundly affect <andsystem-candidate> shape and migration. The lack of cellar organization and uniform cell shape at the equatorial region observed in alphaA/BKO lenses supports this hypothesis. Studies are currently underway to characterize cytoskeletal organization in the alphaA/BKO lens.
16110338	Rod and cone photoreceptors subserve vision under dim and bright light conditions, respectively. The differences in their function are thought to stem from their different gene expression patterns, morphologies, and synaptic connectivities. In this study, we have examined the photoreceptor cells of the retinal degeneration 7 (rd7) mutant mouse, a model for the human enhanced S-cone syndrome (ESCS). This mutant carries a spontaneous deletion in the mouse ortholog of NR2E3, an orphan nuclear receptor transcription factor mutated in ESCS. Employing microarray and in situ hybridization analysis we have found that the rd7 retina contains a modestly increased number of S-opsin–expressing cells that ultrastructurally appear to be normal cones. Strikingly, the majority of the photoreceptors in the rd7 retina represent a morphologically hybrid <andsystem-candidate> type that expresses both rod- and cone-specific genes. In addition, in situ hybridization screening of genes shown to be up-regulated in the rd7 mutant retina by microarray identified ten new cone-specific or cone-enriched genes with a wide range of biochemical functions, including two genes specifically involved in glucose/glycogen metabolism. We suggest that the abnormal electroretinograms, slow retinal degeneration, and retinal dysmorphology seen in humans with ESCS may, in part, be attributable to the aberrant function of a hybrid photoreceptor cell type similar to that identified in this study. The functional diversity of the novel cone-specific genes identified here indicates molecular differences between rods and cones extending far beyond those previously discovered.
16110338	Vision begins with light entering the eye. This light is projected onto the retina, a thin neural structure lining the inside of the eye. Photoreceptors, among the most important <andsystem-candidate> types in the retina, are the first to receive the incoming rays of light. In mammals, there are two types of photoreceptors: rods and cones. Rods are specialized for nighttime vision, and cones for daytime and color vision. In this study, the authors examined the photoreceptors of a mouse with a gene mutation that causes photoreceptors to develop abnormally. Humans with a similar mutation have a form of blindness called enhanced S-cone syndrome (ESCS). Surprisingly, the majority of photoreceptors in this mutant mouse were found to have features of both normal rods and cones. It is possible that the abnormal features of these photoreceptors predispose them to undergo premature death. If this model accurately reflects the situation in human patients with ESCS, it may provide an explanation for the loss of vision seen in this disease. This study also elucidated previously unknown molecular differences between normal rods and cones. This new knowledge may contribute to a better overall understanding of the mechanisms underlying night, day, and color vision.
16110338	The initial reports of patients with ESCS attributed the unusual ERG to an abnormally functioning rod photoreceptor system with persistent activity under light adaptation [6–8]. Subsequent studies, however, concluded that the ERG was due to supernumerary short-wavelength (“blue”) cone photoreceptors (S-cones) in these patients [1,2,9–11]. Histopathologic analysis of a retina from a human patient with ESCS and extensive retinal degeneration demonstrated an absence of rhodopsin-positive cells and an increase in the number of S-cone opsin-expressing cells. Nevertheless, the overall density of cones was only modestly increased in this patient (approximately 2-fold), suggesting that there might be additional factors that contribute to the very large, light-adapted ERG seen in this disease. In addition to the ERG findings, patients with ESCS have dysmorphic retinas with rosette formation in the outer nuclear layer (ONL) where photoreceptor <andsystem-candidate> bodies reside, and a slow retinal degeneration that can ultimately lead to complete blindness [12–14].
16110338	Mutations in the mouse ortholog of NR2E3 have been identified in the spontaneous mutant retinal degeneration 7 (rd7) [15]. This mutant demonstrates slow retinal degeneration and abnormal lamination of the ONL with rosette formation [15,16]. Curiously, the ERG of the mouse under both light and dark adaptation has been reported to be normal, showing progressive attenuation with time, presumably due to degenerative <andsystem-candidate> loss [15]. A prior study showed a 2- to 3-fold increase in the number S-opsin–positive cells in the rd7 retina compared to wild type [17]. In addition, two groups recently reported derepression of additional cone genes in the rd7 mutant [18,19].
16110338	In order to better understand the mechanistic basis of ESCS, we undertook a molecular and ultrastructural analysis of the photoreceptors of the rd7 mutant mouse. Microarray and in situ hybridization analyses revealed a modest increase in the number of S-opsin–positive cells and widespread derepression of many cone-specific genes within rod photoreceptor cells. Ultrastructural studies demonstrated that the cells that coexpress rod and cone genes in the rd7 retina represent a morphologically hybrid <andsystem-candidate> type, intermediate between normal rods and cones.
16110338	The second category of cone gene derepression (type II) consisted of a patchy, salt-and-pepper pattern of ectopic expression in which individual positive cells were scattered throughout the ONL (Figure 2, upper right photomicrographs; Table S1). Although numerous positive cells were present in the rd7 retina (particularly in the ventral portion), there were clearly many interspersed cells that showed a complete absence of expression. In order to rule out the possibility that these scattered positive cells were simply the normal complement of cones that had failed to localize their <andsystem-candidate> bodies to the scleral edge of the ONL, the number of positive cells in the rd7 retina was quantitated by dissociated cell in situ hybridization.
16110338	Dissociated <andsystem-candidate> in situ hybridization was performed using a probe for the S-cone opsin gene (Opn1sw), which shows type II derepression (Figures 2 and 3A–3C). S-opsin was expressed in 3.2% of retinal cells in the rd7 mutant (66 S-opsin–positive cells out of 2,056 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole [DAPI]-positive cells). This value is approximately 2-fold greater than the percentage of S-opsin–positive cells identified in wild-type control retinas, 1.65% (54 S-opsin-positive cells out of 3,271 DAPI-positive cells), and accords well with the previously reported value of 2- to 3-fold more S-opsin–positive cells in rd7 compared to wild type arrived at by antibody staining of tissue sections [17].
16110338	In most cases, the novel cone genes identified in this study appear to have a type I pattern of derepression. However, due to the weakness of the signal in some cases, or transcript localization to the inner segment in others, it was not always possible to determine with confidence which of the two patterns of derepression (if either) each of these genes displayed. In terms of functional categorization, the novel cone genes cover a broad range including glucose metabolism (Pygm and Glo1), fatty acid metabolism (Elovl2), DNA repair (Smug1), <andsystem-candidate> cycle/chromosome segregation (Bub1b), carcinogenesis (Tcta), endothelial biology (Ece1), cytoskeletal function (Ebp4.1l1), and even otolith formation (Otop3).
16110338	One further finding to note is that the <andsystem-candidate> bodies of the M-opsin–positive cells appear to be scattered throughout the ONL in the rd7 mutant at P14 (Figure S8). Despite this fact, their overall number does not appear to be increased relative to wild-type. In addition, by P28, the M-opsin-positive cell bodies in rd7 appear to have relocated to their normal position at the scleral edge of the ONL (Figure S8). It is known that until P11, the cell bodies of cone photoreceptors in the mouse are normally dispersed throughout the ONL, only to relocate subsequently to the scleral edge of the ONL around P12 [23]. It is possible that in the rd7 mutant retina, there is a short delay in the relocation of the M-opsin–expressing cone cell bodies to the scleral edge of the ONL.
16110338	One gene, RIKEN cDNA 4933409K07 (Figure 1, gene G47), was found to be up-regulated on microarray at all four timepoints examined. This gene showed a unique pattern of expression in the adult rd7 mutant retina. Whereas there was only a barely detectable hint of expression in the inner nuclear layer (INL) in the wild-type retina, this gene showed strong expression in the middle and vitreal thirds of the INL as well as patchy expression in the ganglion <andsystem-candidate> layer (GCL) and at the scleral edge of the ONL in rd7 (see Table S1). This in situ hybridization pattern is consistent with staining in Müller glia, the principal glial cell type of the mouse retina. One possible interpretation of this unusual expression pattern is that it represents an early reaction of Müller glia to injury in this mutant.
16110338	In order to assess the morphologic effects of the above gene expression changes, the ultrastructure of the photoreceptor <andsystem-candidate> bodies in the rd7 mutant was examined. The cell bodies were chosen for evaluation rather than the outer segments, since in the mouse, the ultrastructural differences between rod and cone somata are much greater than are the differences between the outer segments [26]. In the wild-type mouse, cone cell bodies are aligned along the scleral border of the ONL, and they are larger than those of rods. They have a smaller, more irregular mass of nuclear heterochromatin that is often broken up into multiple discrete clumps connected by thin threads. They also have more abundant electron-lucent euchromatin than rods. Lastly, they frequently have a patch of organelle-rich cytoplasm next to their nuclei, usually containing large mitochondria [26].
16110338	Analysis of toluidine blue-stained semi-thin sections revealed that such cone-like cells were present in greater abundance in the rd7 retina than in wild-type, and that their somata were scattered throughout the ONL (Figure 7). A comparison between the distribution of these cells and those expressing S-cone opsin strongly suggests that they represent the same <andsystem-candidate> population (compare Figure 7D and 7F). Analysis of the nuclear morphology of dissociated retinal cells stained for S-cone opsin by dissociated cell in situ hybridization confirmed that this is the case (unpublished data). These findings, along with the absence of rhodopsin staining in these cells (see Figure 3D–3F), suggest that these “cone-like” cells in the rd7 mutant retina may represent supernumerary normal cones with an abnormal localization of their cell bodies.
16110338	Analysis of toluidine blue-stained semi-thin sections revealed that such cone-like cells were present in greater abundance in the rd7 retina than in wild-type, and that their somata were scattered throughout the ONL (Figure 7). A comparison between the distribution of these cells and those expressing S-cone opsin strongly suggests that they represent the same cell population (compare Figure 7D and 7F). Analysis of the nuclear morphology of dissociated retinal cells stained for S-cone opsin by dissociated cell in situ hybridization confirmed that this is the case (unpublished data). These findings, along with the absence of rhodopsin staining in these cells (see Figure 3D–3F), suggest that these “cone-like” cells in the rd7 mutant retina may represent supernumerary normal cones with an abnormal localization of their <andsystem-candidate> bodies.
16110338	In contrast to the cone <andsystem-candidate> body, the wild-type rod soma is small and nearly round. It has a single, large clump of dense heterochromatin, a thin rim of moderately electron-dense euchromatin, and very scant juxtanuclear cytoplasm without organelles [26,27]. The second cell population in the ONL of the rd7 retina has some of the nuclear features of normal rods, such as a single, dense mass of heterochromatin and moderately electron-dense euchromatin (Figure 7H); yet these cells also show features of cones. First, the euchromatin is, on average, more abundant in these cells than in wild-type rods (compare Figure 7G and 7H). In addition, comparison of the diagrammatic representation of the wild-type and rd7 ONLs suggests that the average area of the S-opsin–negative cells in rd7 is greater than in the wild-type (Figure 7C and 7D). In order to confirm this impression, we quantitated the area of 50 wild-type and 50 mutant rod-like cell bodies (see Materials and Methods for details). This experiment confirmed that the average area of the rod-like somata in rd7 is approximately 30% larger than that of wild-type rod somata (mean area in rd7 was 9.75 ± 1.36 (standard deviation) μm2, compared to wild-type rods, with 7.53 ± 0.72 μm2 ; n = 50; p = 7.6 × 10–16, Student's t-test). It is also notable that the standard deviation of the somal area is nearly twice as great in rd7 than in wild-type, confirming the subjective impression of greater variability in somal size and shape in the mutant compared to the wild-type (compare Figure 7C and 7D).
16110338	In contrast to the cone cell body, the wild-type rod <andsystem-candidate> is small and nearly round. It has a single, large clump of dense heterochromatin, a thin rim of moderately electron-dense euchromatin, and very scant juxtanuclear cytoplasm without organelles [26,27]. The second cell population in the ONL of the rd7 retina has some of the nuclear features of normal rods, such as a single, dense mass of heterochromatin and moderately electron-dense euchromatin (Figure 7H); yet these cells also show features of cones. First, the euchromatin is, on average, more abundant in these cells than in wild-type rods (compare Figure 7G and 7H). In addition, comparison of the diagrammatic representation of the wild-type and rd7 ONLs suggests that the average area of the S-opsin–negative cells in rd7 is greater than in the wild-type (Figure 7C and 7D). In order to confirm this impression, we quantitated the area of 50 wild-type and 50 mutant rod-like cell bodies (see Materials and Methods for details). This experiment confirmed that the average area of the rod-like somata in rd7 is approximately 30% larger than that of wild-type rod somata (mean area in rd7 was 9.75 ± 1.36 (standard deviation) μm2, compared to wild-type rods, with 7.53 ± 0.72 μm2 ; n = 50; p = 7.6 × 10–16, Student's t-test). It is also notable that the standard deviation of the somal area is nearly twice as great in rd7 than in wild-type, confirming the subjective impression of greater variability in somal size and shape in the mutant compared to the wild-type (compare Figure 7C and 7D).
16110338	Lastly, 38% (19/50) of the rd7 photoreceptors selected for somal area quantitation had prominent juxtanuclear mitochondria (red arrow in Figure 7H; unpublished data). Such juxtanuclear organelles are only very rarely seen in normal rods (1.5%; six out of 399 cells counted), but are common in cones (yellow arrow in Figure 7H). In conclusion, it is clear that this second <andsystem-candidate> population in the rd7 retina has morphological features of both normal rods and cones consistent with the coexpression of many rod- and cone-specific genes in these cells.
16110338	The second pattern of derepression seen in the rd7 retina (type II), is represented by a scattered population of cells throughout the ONL that shows derepression of several cone-specific genes, including S-cone opsin. By ultrastructural criteria, these cells appear to be normal cones, albeit with displaced <andsystem-candidate> bodies. Quantitation of these supernumerary S-cone opsin-positive cells indicates that they are approximately 2-fold more abundant than in normal retina, consistent with previous antibody studies [17].
16110338	One of the most curious findings in the rd7 mutant retina was the occurrence of two different types of changes: an increase in the number of S-opsin–expressing cones and a transformation of rods into hybrid photoreceptors. It is known that Nr2e3 is expressed only in rods, and the transcript is first detectable in postmitotic cells (J. Trimarchi and CLC, unpublished data). Assuming that Nr2e3 acts <andsystem-candidate> autonomously, we can conclude that the supernumerary S-cone–positive cells and the hybrid photoreceptors identified in the rd7 retina were redirected to these fates from postmitotic cells that were destined to become rods. This conclusion raises this question: Why does loss of a single transcription factor within rod precursors lead to two alternative fates—a hybrid cell type on the one hand and apparently normal S-cones on the other? There are at least two possible explanations for these differences.
16110338	First, it is possible that there are two distinct types of rod precursor; loss of Nr2e3 in one leads to S-cone fate and in the other results in a hybrid <andsystem-candidate> type. In fact, there is experimental evidence from the rat to support the conclusion that early-born and late-born rods are intrinsically different [37]. One test of the hypothesis that there are two temporally distinct rod precursor populations would be to carry out birthdating experiments to determine whether the supernumerary S-opsin–positive cells in the rd7 retina derived exclusively from an early- or late-born population. Of course, if this were not the case, this experiment could not rule out the possibility that molecularly distinct populations of rod precursors are present simultaneously in the developing retina.
16110338	These findings, however, do not rule out the possibility that the abnormal human ERG derives from a hybrid photoreceptor <andsystem-candidate> type that also expresses S-opsin. It is possible that there are gene regulatory differences between mice and humans such that in human NR2E3 mutants, S-opsin shows a type I pattern of derepression rather than a type II as in seen in the rd7 mouse, and is therefore expressed in all of the hybrid photoreceptor cells. Alternatively, the ratio of supernumerary S-cones to hybrid photoreceptors produced in the retina of ESCS patients might be such that a higher percentage of the presumptive rods in ESCS patients become S-cones rather than hybrid photoreceptors. As discussed above, this ratio could depend either on the relative percentages of two distinct rod precursor populations or on stochastic effects on regulatory gene expression.
16110338	In contrast to the ERG differences between mouse rd7 and human NR2E3 mutants, both species demonstrate slow retinal degeneration. It is possible that this degeneration is attributable to the abnormal function of the hybrid photoreceptor <andsystem-candidate> type characterized in the present study. The coexpression of both rod and cone genes in the same cell could predispose the cell to apoptosis.
16110338	The final common feature between mouse rd7 and human NR2E3 mutants is the presence of an abnormally laminated retina with waviness and rosette formation in the ONL [12–15]. The cause of this abnormality is not known, but it is possibly related to defects in photoreceptor <andsystem-candidate> polarity in the rd7 mutant. Rosette formation and abnormally wavy epithelia are common sequelae of defects in pathways controlling cell polarity [46,47]. In particular, loss-of-function mutations in the polarity gene crumbs (CRB1) have been shown to cause morphological abnormalities of the ONL in both humans and mice, including rosette formation in mice very similar to that seen in the rd7 mutant [48,49]. Interestingly, Sharon et al. [5] have recently pointed out additional features shared by patients with CRB1 mutations and mutations in NR2E3, including hyperopic refractive errors and a distinctive pattern of clumped pigmentation in the retina.
16110338	One further point worthy of note is the striking similarity between the hybrid photoreceptor identified in this study and a naturally occurring photoreceptor found in ground squirrels. The “rods” of this species have electrophysiologic, molecular, and ultrastructural features of both rods and cones [52–58]. Although these unusual findings have been difficult to interpret under the usual assumptions of “duplicity theory” [56], we would like to suggest that ground squirrels may have experienced a naturally occurring down-regulation or loss of Nr2e3 expression in their “rods” that transformed them into a hybrid photoreceptor <andsystem-candidate> type. The adaptive significance of such a change, if any, is unknown, and it may simply be due to relaxation of selective pressure for night vision in this strictly diurnal species.
16110338	Section in situ hybridization was performed as previously described [61] using 20-μm cryosections from OCT-embedded tissue or 4-μm paraffin sections. All in situ hybridizations were performed with the mutant and wild-type control sections on the same glass slide. Riboprobes labeled with digoxygenin-tagged UTP (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) were detected with NBT/BCIP (Sigma, St. Louis, Missouri, United States). The sources of the individual riboprobes used in this study are described in Tables S1 and S2. Dissociated <andsystem-candidate> in situ hybridization was performed as described previously [62] using the same S-opsin digoxygenin-labeled probe used for section in situ hybridization. All images were captured on a compound microscope (Eclipse e1000; Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) using a CCD camera (DXM1200F, Nikon). S-opsin positive cells were quantitated on dissociated cell in situ hybridization as previously described [62]. Twenty fields were quantitated in this manner at 200× magnification for both rd7 and wild-type retinas.
16110338	The area of the <andsystem-candidate> bodies of the rods and “rod-like” cells in the wild-type and mutant ONLs, respectively, were quantitated in the following manner. First, ten fields within the ONL were chosen at random at 1,000× magnification and then photographed at 4,000× magnification for each of the two genotypes. Such images typically contained 35–45 cell bodies. In order to quantitate only the area of those cell bodies that were cut as near to the midline of the cell as possible (i.e., in order to obtain the maximal cross-sectional area) the five cells with the largest apparent area in each photograph were chosen by eye and the outline of the cell membranes were traced onto white paper. These tracings were scanned along with the size bar from the electron micrographs, and the areas of the resulting digital images were quantitated using Scion Image software (NIH Image, http://rsb.info.nih.gov/nih-image). A total of 50 cells of each genotype were quantitated in this manner. In addition, in order to evaluate the percentage of rods in the wild-type retina that had any juxtanuclear mitochondria, all rods within all ten images were counted as were the number of cells showing juxtanuclear organelles. A total of six out of 399 wild-type rods (1.5%) possessed a juxtanuclear organelle. This analysis permitted us to evaluate the wild-type rods for juxtanuclear mitochondria at multiple planes of section; however, serial sections of individual cell bodies were not performed.
16110338	The area of the cell bodies of the rods and “rod-like” cells in the wild-type and mutant ONLs, respectively, were quantitated in the following manner. First, ten fields within the ONL were chosen at random at 1,000× magnification and then photographed at 4,000× magnification for each of the two genotypes. Such images typically contained 35–45 cell bodies. In order to quantitate only the area of those cell bodies that were cut as near to the midline of the cell as possible (i.e., in order to obtain the maximal cross-sectional area) the five cells with the largest apparent area in each photograph were chosen by eye and the outline of the <andsystem-candidate> membranes were traced onto white paper. These tracings were scanned along with the size bar from the electron micrographs, and the areas of the resulting digital images were quantitated using Scion Image software (NIH Image, http://rsb.info.nih.gov/nih-image). A total of 50 cells of each genotype were quantitated in this manner. In addition, in order to evaluate the percentage of rods in the wild-type retina that had any juxtanuclear mitochondria, all rods within all ten images were counted as were the number of cells showing juxtanuclear organelles. A total of six out of 399 wild-type rods (1.5%) possessed a juxtanuclear organelle. This analysis permitted us to evaluate the wild-type rods for juxtanuclear mitochondria at multiple planes of section; however, serial sections of individual cell bodies were not performed.
16110338	The color coding of text in the column “Gene Name” is as follows: light blue (G1–G15), genes previously reported in the literature to have cone-specific or cone-enriched patterns of expression; yellow (G16–G25), novel cone genes identified in an unrelated study (unpublished data); dark green (G26–G36), novel cone genes identified in the present study that were up-regulated in rd7; light green (G37–G46), additional genes found to be up-regulated in rd7 by microarray in the present study but that had either weak or inapparent cone-specific signal on in situ hybridization; white (G47–G53), additional genes up-regulated by microarray at two different timepoints but with either unusual expression patterns or nonconfirmatory in situ hybridizations. The column “ID” contains identifiers used in the present paper to refer to specific genes. “GenBank ID” contains the GenBank accession number of the clone used to make the probe for in situ hybridization. Within this column, “lab clone” indicates that the probe used for in situ hybridization derived from a clone in our laboratory. The region of the gene to which it corresponds is indicated in Table S1. Columns “P0” through “P21” contain the results of microarray experiments at the given postnatal dates. P0, P6, and P14 time points represent analyses on cDNA microarrays; the P21 time point represents data from an Affymetrix microarray (mouse genome 432 2.0). A red <andsystem-candidate> with a single up arrow indicates that the gene in question was up-regulated in three out of three microarrays at that time point (as described in Materials and Methods). Those cells labeled orange with a single up arrow and asterisk indicate that the gene in question was up-regulated in two out of three microarrays at that time point. The column “In Situ” lists the type of derepression seen for the gene in question in the rd7 mutant retina (type I and type II are described in the main text). Genes designated “unclassified” represent patterns of derepression that were difficult to classify as either type I or type II (see main text for more details). “Wild type” in this column indicates that the in situ hybridization pattern in the rd7 mutant retina was not different from the wild-type pattern; and “special” indicates a special pattern of expression discussed more fully in the main text. The column “Expression Pattern” contains a concise description of the wild-type expression pattern of the gene in question. In the case of genes for which no signal was obtained on in situ hybridization in the present study, the specified expression pattern derives from reports in the literature. Within this column, “cone > rod” indicates that the gene is expressed in all photoreceptors, but at higher levels in cones than rods; “cone?” indicates very weak staining in a cone-like distribution.
16110338	BP, bipolar cells; EP, early photoreceptor expression pattern; <andsystem-candidate>, inner core segment localization; MG, Müller glia; N/A, not available on the microarray; NS, no signal detected on in situ hybridization; RPE, retinal pigment epithelium.
16110338	(C and D) Hand-drawn diagrams of the cells in (A) and (B), respectively. Cells with the nuclear features of cones are highlighted in blue. Note that the number of such cells is greater in the mutant, and their <andsystem-candidate> bodies are scattered throughout the outer nuclear layer. In addition, the overall columnar architecture of the outer nuclear layer seen in the wild type is disrupted in this portion of the mutant retina. Other portions of the mutant retina with fewer supernumerary cone cells, however, retain the normal columnar appearance (unpublished data).
16110338	(G and H) Electron micrographs of the outer nuclear layer (10,000× magnification). Note the uniform distribution of rod <andsystem-candidate> bodies in the wild type (G). The cell bodies are nearly round and consist almost exclusively of a nucleus with a single, dense mass of heterochromatin. In the rd7 mutant (H), two types of cell are shown. The ovoid one with a lesser quantity of heterochromatin, paler euchromatin, and two juxtanuclear mitochondria (yellow arrow) represents a typical cone cell body. The adjacent cell with a more “rod-like” mass of heterochromatin and a single juxtanuclear mitochondrion (red arrow) represents one of the hybrid photoreceptors discussed more fully in the main text.
16539743	In the development of the mammalian retina, a diverse range of <andsystem-candidate> types is generated from a pool of multipotent retinal progenitor cells. Among these cell types, photoreceptors account for over 70% of all cells in the retina. In vertebrates, there are two classes of photoreceptors, rods and cones. Rods are sensors of dim light, while cones function in bright light and are responsible for color vision. Phototransduction, a series of signal amplifications detecting a single photon of light, is initiated by the capture of light with 11-cis-retinal, a chromophore bound by the opsin proteins: rhodopsin in rods and cone opsins in cones. The proteins that carry out phototransduction are located in an elaborate and highly specialized membranous structure, the outer segment. The outer segment appears to be relatively fragile, degenerating in response to many environmental and/or genetic perturbations. In the rodent retina, the production of specific cell types during development progresses in a general order [1,2]. Rod photoreceptor generation peaks around the time of birth. Cone photoreceptors, ganglion cells, horizontal cells and amacrine cells are generated earlier, while Müller glia and bipolar cells are generated later. This production of different cell types at different times appears to derive from differences in the intrinsic properties of progenitor cells involved in the transcription or chromatin modification. Recent studies identified several important transcription factors of photoreceptor development [3-7]. Two Otx family homeobox genes, Otx2 and Crx, play essential roles in early cell fate determination and terminal differentiation of photoreceptors [3,8,9]. In the absence of Otx2 function, differentiating photoreceptor cells are converted to amacrine-like neurons [9]. Crx, a downstream target of Otx2, controls the transcription of various photoreceptor cell-specific genes and is essential for the formation of outer segments, synaptic terminals, and phototransduction pathways [8,10]. Crx transcripts begin to be expressed in developing photoreceptors at embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5) in the mouse and a strong upregulation of Crx transcription is apparent across the differentiating photoreceptors at postnatal day 6 (P6). Photoreceptor cells in the Crx knockout (KO) mice exhibit a dramatic reduction of many photoreceptor molecules including visual pigments and develop neither photoreceptor outer segments nor a synaptic terminus [8,10]. In addition, mutations of human CRX have been demonstrated to be associated with three types of photoreceptor diseases: autosomal dominant cone-rod dystrophy 2, autosomal dominant-type retinitis pigmentosa, and Leber's congenital amaurosis (LCA) [11-14]. While Otx2 and Crx control general photoreceptor development, three other transcription factors, TRβ2, Nrl, and Nr2e3 regulate the specification of photoreceptor cell types [4,5,7].
16539743	SAM domains (also known as Pointed, HLH, or SPM domains) are ~70 residues long and have been reported as common protein-protein interaction modules [15-17]. This domain is found in a large number of proteins, including Polycomb group (PcG) proteins [18], serine threonine kinases [19], Eph family receptor tyrosine kinases [20], the p73 tumor suppressor [21], the RNA-binding protein Smaug [22], diacylglycerol kinases [23,24], yeast mating type signaling proteins [19,25] and ETS family transcription factors [26,27]. The PcG proteins are transcriptional repressors that maintain gene silencing during development [28-30]. In mammals, PcG proteins are also implicated in Hox gene regulation. Their biological activity lies in stable silencing of specific sets of genes through chromatin modifications. A member of polycomb repressive complex 1 (<andsystem-candidate>), ph, contains a SAM domain at the C-terminal, and PRC1 complex is known to form helical, head-to-tail polymers through its SAM domain [31]. These polymeric structures mediate the formation of a higher order chromatin structure and possibly stabilize the repressed state of Hox genes.
16539743	mr-s expression in developing mouse retina and pineal gland. (A-G) mr-s expression during development of the mouse retina. The in situ hybridization signal of mr-s was not detected at E13 (A). The signal (arrow) was first detected in the outer aspect of NBL at E18 (B). A strong mr-s signal was detected in outer layer of the retina at P3-P6, and then the signal decreased in the adult retina (E-G). Control with the sense probe in E18 retina is shown (C). Scale bar, 100 μm. (H) Northern blot analysis of mr-s expression in adult mouse organs. The arrow corresponds to 2.2kb mr-s transcript. (I) RT-PCR analysis of total RNAs extracted from E13 whole embryo, P0 whole body (except for the eye), P7 retina, P7 pineal gland, P7 brain, P7 liver, adult retina, adult pineal gland, adult brain and adult liver, respectively. RPE, retinal pigment epithelium; NR, neural retina; NBL, neuroblastic layer; GCL, ganglion <andsystem-candidate> layer; ONL, outer nuclear layer; INL, inner nuclear layer.
16539743	To further examine whether Crx regulates mr-s transcription directly or not, we next performed a luciferase assay using the 1.2-kb proximal promoter region of mr-s fused to a luciferase gene as a luciferase reporter (Fig. 3D, Pro1.2k) and the Crx, Otx2, Nrl expression vectors, respectively. This 1.2-kb region of the mr-s upstream sequence contains three Crx binding consensus sequences. As shown in Fig. 3E, the luciferase activity was significantly upregulated when the Crx or Otx2 expression vector was co-introduced with Pro1.2k into HEK293T cells, while the luciferase activity was not altered when the Nrl expression vector was co-introduced. A previous report suggested that the transcriptional activity of Crx is augmented with Nrl when the rhodopsin promoter was used as a reporter gene [6]. On the other hand, our present data showed that the luciferase gene expression was not upregulated when both Crx and Nrl expression vectors were co-introduced with Pro1.2k compared to the activity when the Crx only expression vector was introduced. This may be due to <andsystem-candidate> type differences because a cell type of retinal/pineal origin was not used in our luciferase assay. In addition, our present data showed that Otx2, which is reported to have the same binding consensus as Crx, also transactivated mr-s expression. As shown in Fig. 2A–F, the expression pattern of mr-s correlates with that of Crx. In contrast, the transcripts of Otx2 are mainly detected in the photoreceptor layer at embryonic stages. Therefore, we concluded that mr-s transcription is directly regulated mainly by Crx.
16539743	A member of PcG proteins, ph, does not contain an obvious sequence-specific DNA binding motif (16). Ph functions as a transcriptional repressor through its polymerization and protein-protein interaction with other sequence-specific transcriptional repressors, which can form a higher order chromatin structure. The mr-s protein also does not have an obvious DNA-binding domain. To characterize the biochemical activity of mr-s, we next performed a luciferase assay. We generated effector plasmids, which express various deletion constructs of mr-s fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain (Fig. 7A). We first confirmed that full-length mr-s fused to GAL4 DNA binding domain (DBD-mrs) had no effect on the pGL3 promoter plasmid lacking GAL4 binding sites (data not shown). When the 5xGAL4-pGL3 reporter plasmid was co-transfected, DBD-mrs repressed luciferase activity by about 90% in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 7B). As a control, GAL4 DNA-binding domain (DBD) had no significant effect on the 5xGAL4-pGL3 reporter plasmid. In addition, we confirmed that full-length mr-s without GAL4 DBD had no effect on the same reporter plasmid (data not shown). We next analyzed deletion constructs in which the N-terminus 400 aa stretch of mr-s (amino acids 1 to 400) or the C-terminus portion (amino acids 391 to 542) were fused to the GAL4 DBD (Fig. 7A, DBD-N, DBD-C). While DBD-N had no repressive effect on this reporter activity, DBD-C repressed luciferase gene expression by about 65%. This result suggested to us the possibility that DBD-mrs exerts transcriptional repressive activity via self-association through its SAM domain. To investigate whether the homophilic association of mr-s is required for transcriptional repression, two site-directed mutants, DBD-W404A and DBD-G453A, either of which may reduce self-binding ability, were analyzed (Fig. 7C). Compared to DBD-mrs, DBD-W404A and DBD-G453A had repression activity of 72% and 87%, respectively. While the ability of mr-s self-association partially correlates with transcriptional repressive activity, these mutants do not compromise the ability to repress transcription critically. To determine the regions of mr-s involved in transcriptional repression more precisely, the C-terminus portion was divided into two regions and each was fused to the GAL4 DBD (Fig. 7A, DBD-tail, DBD-SAM). As a consequence, DBD-SAM (amino acids 384 to 462) did not have a repressive effect on the 5xGAL4-pGL3 reporter plasmid. On the other hand, luciferase activity was repressed by 55% when DBD-tail (amino acids 459 to 542) was co-transfected with this reporter plasmid (Fig. 7D). To assess the transcriptional repressive activity of mr-s in cells of retinal origin, we performed similar experiments using human Y79 retinoblastoma cells. The results indicated that DBD-mrs also reduced luciferase activity significantly in Y79 retinoblastoma cells (Fig. 7E). However, luciferase activity was repressed by about 30% in Y79 cells, while it was repressed by 90% in HEK293T cells. This might be due to the difference in transfection efficiency between these <andsystem-candidate> lines. Another possibility is that intracellular environment in Y79 cells, a retinoblastoma cell line, is insufficient for recapitulating developing photoreceptors. In this study, we did not address the question whether or not our in vitro data reflect native mr-s transcriptional repression in vivo. However, these in vitro experiments using HEK293T and Y79 cells strongly support our hypothesis that mr-s functions as a transcriptional repressor in developing photoreceptors. Our results suggested that the C-terminal region of mr-s (amino acids 463 to 542) is required for transcriptional repression of mr-s and the SAM domain appears to be dispensable for this repressive activity. This C-terminal region of mouse mr-s is highly conserved among species (Fig. 7F). The sequence identity of the region was 93%, 73%, 41% and 40% for rat, human, chick and zebrafish, respectively (Fig. 1D). This strongly suggests that the C-terminal region of mouse mr-s functions as a transcriptional repressive domain in photoreceptor development. However, this region does not contain characteristic amino acid motifs and the mechanism through which the region achieves and/or maintains gene repression remains to be clarified in the future.
16539743	Two distinct multiprotein PcG complexes, <andsystem-candidate> and PRC2, have been identified. PRC2 is involved in the initiation of silencing and contains histone deacetylases (HDACs) and histone methyltransferases, which can methylate histone H3 lysine 9 and 27, marks of silenced chromatin. PRC1, including ph, recognizes the histone H3 lysine 27 mark set by PRC2 and maintains a stable state of gene repression in which PRC1 blocks chromatin remodeling by the trithorax group-related SWI-SNF complex [46,47]. Therefore, the mechanism of repression by PRC2 is thought to be HDAC-dependent while the mechanism of repression by PRC1 appears to be HDAC-independent. Our luciferase assay also showed that transcriptional repression of DBD-mrs was not affected by the addition of various concentrations of trichostatin A, a potent HDAC inhibitor (data not shown). Therefore, we speculate that the mechanism of repression of mr-s may be HDAC-independent and more similar to that of PRC1 complex.
16539743	In the present study, the biochemical experiments demonstrate that the mr-s protein functions as a transcriptional repressor and possibly down-regulates the spatial and temporal expression of the target genes during retinal photoreceptor development. Our data also revealed that the repressive activity of mr-s is mainly due to the C-terminal region (amino acids 463 to 542). However, downstream targets of mr-s still remain unclear. In situ hybridization showed that the peak of mr-s expression is around P6, when retinal photoreceptors undergo terminal differentiation. We hypothesize that the target genes of mr-s might be non-photoreceptor genes. In this case, mr-s may suppress the expression of non-photoreceptor genes in rod and cone photoreceptors. There may be another possibility that mr-s is involved in <andsystem-candidate> fate determination of rod photoreceptors versus cone photoreceptors. While cone photoreceptors are born during the early embryonic stages of mouse retinogenesis, rod photoreceptors are born primarily in the late embryonic and early postnatal period [48]. The expression pattern of mr-s may suggest that mr-s is expressed in rod photoreceptors but not in cone photoreceptors as well as Nr2e3, which is known as a transcriptional repressor and is thought to down-regulate cone photoreceptor-specific genes. To clarify the biological function of mr-s, analysis of mice with targeted disruptions of mr-s will be very important.
16539743	For immunoprecipitation assay, 4× hemagglutinin (HA) or 3× Flag tagged cDNA fragment encoding full-length mr-s (full-HA and Flag-mrs), a cDNA fragment encoding amino acids 1–400 (ΔSAM-HA and Flag-ΔSAM), and a cDNA fragment encoding amino acids 400–542 (Flag-SAM) were subcloned into the pcDNA3 (Invitrogen) expression vector. We also constructed two site-directed mutants, Flag-W404A and Flag-G453A, using PCR. Each of these mutations was also introduced into Flag-mr-s. We transfected HEK293T cells with 5 μg of plasmid DNA per 6 cm dish by calcium phosphate method. Approximately 48 hr after transfection, cells were harvested in immunoprecipitation buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride [Wako], 1% Nonidet P-40, 10% glycerol) in the presence of protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche). For each reaction, 1 mg of <andsystem-candidate> lysate was mixed with 0.5 μg of anti-Flag antibody (SIGMA, F3165) and 15 μl of protein G-Sepharose (Amersham) on a rotating wheel at 4°C for 2 hrs. Protein concentration was determined by the BCA protein assay system (Pierce). The beads were then washed three times with immunoprecipitation buffer and followed by three times with wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM MgCl2). Proteins were then boiled for 5 min in SDS sample buffer (1% SDS, 1 mM Tris [pH 6.8], 40 mM DTT, 4% glycerol, 0.01% pyronine Y). The supernatants were fractionated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and transferred to the nitrocellulose membrane (Trans-Blot Transfer Medium, Bio-Rad). Western blotting was performed with rabbit polyclonal anti-HA antibody (Santa Cruz, #sc-805). Signals were detected with horseradish peroxidase- conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG and ECL plus Western Blotting Detection System (Amersham).
15005800	In this study, we characterized further the role of cholesterol deficiency in lung development of these mice. Significant growth retardation, beginning at E14.5~E16.5, was observed in Dhcr7-/- embryos. Normal lobation but smaller lungs with a significant decrease in lung-to-body weight ratio was noted in Dhcr7-/- embryos, compared to controls. Lung branching morphogenesis was comparable between Dhcr7-/- and controls at early stages, but delayed saccular development was visible in all Dhcr7-/- embryos from E17.5 onwards. Impaired pre-alveolar development of varying severity, inhibited <andsystem-candidate> proliferation, delayed differentiation of type I alveolar epithelial cells (AECs) and delayed vascular development were all evident in knockout lungs. Differentiation of type II AECs was apparently normal as judged by surfactant protein (SP) mRNAs and SP-C immunostaining. A significant amount of cholesterol was detectable in knockout lungs, implicating some maternal transfer of cholesterol. No significant differences of the spatial-temporal localization of sonic hedgehog (Shh) or its downstream targets by immunohistochemistry were detected between knockout and wild-type lungs and Shh autoprocessing occurred normally in tissues from Dhcr7-/- embryos.
15005800	Cholesterol is a necessary membrane constituent of all mammalian, reptile and avian cells, as well as a few other organisms, but not all eukaryotic organisms. In the latter cases, such as plants and fungi, cholesterol-like sterols (phytosterols, ergosterol etc.) seem to substitute for cholesterol. The precise need for sterols in biological membranes still remains poorly defined, though its link with microdomains (variously termed rafts, caveoli etc.) may be part of the answer [1]. Although the accumulation of cholesterol in atherosclerotic plaques has led to the concept that 'too much' cholesterol may be deleterious, too little cholesterol has now been proven pathophysiological for abnormal embryonic development. Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS, MIM 270400), a relative common dysmorphology disorder, is caused by mutations in DHCR7 [2-5], which encodes for 7-dehydrocholesterol Δ7-reductase and catalyzes a final step of cholesterol biosynthesis. Recognition of other dysmorphology syndromes caused by defects in the post-squalene cholesterol biosynthesis pathway, such as desmosterolosis, lathosterolosis, <andsystem-candidate>-linked chondrodysplasia punctanta and CHILD syndrome [6-15], has strengthened this concept.
15005800	Does the loss of normal cholesterol biosynthesis lead to abnormalities of <andsystem-candidate> proliferation/division or cell death? Cell proliferation was examined by immunostaining for PCNA and also by BrdU incorporation. Both PCNA and BrdU staining of wild-type and knockout lungs at early gestational stages (E13.5 and E14.5) showed comparable patterns (Fig. 4, panels A-D). However, a clear reduction of PCNA and BrdU labeling was visualized in distal lungs of knockout embryos at late gestational stages (E18.5 and E20.5, Fig. 4, panels E-H). Attenuated PCNA labeling was also noted in knockout hearts at term (Fig. 4, cf. panels I and J). When lungs were stained for pHH3, a marker of active cell division, a clear reduction of pHH3 expression in the epithelium of knockout lung was observed at E20.5 but not at E14.5 (Fig. 4, panels K, L, O and P). In contrast, using the TUNEL assay, no apparent differences in cell apoptosis rates were observed between wild-type and knockout lungs at E18.5 (Fig. 4, cf. panels M and N). Thus, at the late gestational stages, cell proliferation/division was impaired in knockout embryos with no increase in cell death rates.
15005800	Does the loss of normal cholesterol biosynthesis lead to abnormalities of cell proliferation/division or cell death? <andsystem-candidate> proliferation was examined by immunostaining for PCNA and also by BrdU incorporation. Both PCNA and BrdU staining of wild-type and knockout lungs at early gestational stages (E13.5 and E14.5) showed comparable patterns (Fig. 4, panels A-D). However, a clear reduction of PCNA and BrdU labeling was visualized in distal lungs of knockout embryos at late gestational stages (E18.5 and E20.5, Fig. 4, panels E-H). Attenuated PCNA labeling was also noted in knockout hearts at term (Fig. 4, cf. panels I and J). When lungs were stained for pHH3, a marker of active cell division, a clear reduction of pHH3 expression in the epithelium of knockout lung was observed at E20.5 but not at E14.5 (Fig. 4, panels K, L, O and P). In contrast, using the TUNEL assay, no apparent differences in cell apoptosis rates were observed between wild-type and knockout lungs at E18.5 (Fig. 4, cf. panels M and N). Thus, at the late gestational stages, cell proliferation/division was impaired in knockout embryos with no increase in cell death rates.
15005800	Does the loss of normal cholesterol biosynthesis lead to abnormalities of cell proliferation/division or cell death? Cell proliferation was examined by immunostaining for <andsystem-candidate> and also by BrdU incorporation. Both PCNA and BrdU staining of wild-type and knockout lungs at early gestational stages (E13.5 and E14.5) showed comparable patterns (Fig. 4, panels A-D). However, a clear reduction of PCNA and BrdU labeling was visualized in distal lungs of knockout embryos at late gestational stages (E18.5 and E20.5, Fig. 4, panels E-H). Attenuated PCNA labeling was also noted in knockout hearts at term (Fig. 4, cf. panels I and J). When lungs were stained for pHH3, a marker of active cell division, a clear reduction of pHH3 expression in the epithelium of knockout lung was observed at E20.5 but not at E14.5 (Fig. 4, panels K, L, O and P). In contrast, using the TUNEL assay, no apparent differences in cell apoptosis rates were observed between wild-type and knockout lungs at E18.5 (Fig. 4, cf. panels M and N). Thus, at the late gestational stages, cell proliferation/division was impaired in knockout embryos with no increase in cell death rates.
15005800	Analyses of <andsystem-candidate> proliferation, cell division and cell death. Cell proliferation (PCNA: panels A, B, E and F; BrdU: panels C, D, G and H), cell division (pHH3: panels K, L, O and P) and cell death (TUNEL: panels M and N) were analyzed by immunostaining on lung sections at early and late gestational stages. Both PCNA and BrdU labeled cells in both epithelial and mesenchymal regions were comparable at early stages (E14.5 for PCNA and E13.5 for BrdU) between wild-type (+/+) and knockout (-/-) lungs. Positively stained cells in distal lungs at late stage (E20.5 for PCNA and E18.5 for BrdU) from knockout lungs were markedly reduced, compared with wild-type. PCNA labeling of cardiac muscle was also attenuated in knockout embryos at E20.5 (cf. panels I and J). No apparent differences in TUNEL immunostaining were observed in lung sections at E18.5 between wild-type and knockout. The pHH3 immunostaining was comparable between wild-type and knockout lungs at E14.5, and the lungs from wild-type at E20.5 showed a high index of positive cells, whereas lungs from knockout showed a apparent reduced staining pattern. Note the dividing cells are mainly epithelial. Original magnification: A-D and G-N are 20X; E, F, O and P are 40X.
15005800	Analyses of cell proliferation, cell division and cell death. <andsystem-candidate> proliferation (PCNA: panels A, B, E and F; BrdU: panels C, D, G and H), cell division (pHH3: panels K, L, O and P) and cell death (TUNEL: panels M and N) were analyzed by immunostaining on lung sections at early and late gestational stages. Both PCNA and BrdU labeled cells in both epithelial and mesenchymal regions were comparable at early stages (E14.5 for PCNA and E13.5 for BrdU) between wild-type (+/+) and knockout (-/-) lungs. Positively stained cells in distal lungs at late stage (E20.5 for PCNA and E18.5 for BrdU) from knockout lungs were markedly reduced, compared with wild-type. PCNA labeling of cardiac muscle was also attenuated in knockout embryos at E20.5 (cf. panels I and J). No apparent differences in TUNEL immunostaining were observed in lung sections at E18.5 between wild-type and knockout. The pHH3 immunostaining was comparable between wild-type and knockout lungs at E14.5, and the lungs from wild-type at E20.5 showed a high index of positive cells, whereas lungs from knockout showed a apparent reduced staining pattern. Note the dividing cells are mainly epithelial. Original magnification: A-D and G-N are 20X; E, F, O and P are 40X.
15005800	Analyses of cell proliferation, cell division and cell death. Cell proliferation (<andsystem-candidate>: panels A, B, E and F; BrdU: panels C, D, G and H), cell division (pHH3: panels K, L, O and P) and cell death (TUNEL: panels M and N) were analyzed by immunostaining on lung sections at early and late gestational stages. Both PCNA and BrdU labeled cells in both epithelial and mesenchymal regions were comparable at early stages (E14.5 for PCNA and E13.5 for BrdU) between wild-type (+/+) and knockout (-/-) lungs. Positively stained cells in distal lungs at late stage (E20.5 for PCNA and E18.5 for BrdU) from knockout lungs were markedly reduced, compared with wild-type. PCNA labeling of cardiac muscle was also attenuated in knockout embryos at E20.5 (cf. panels I and J). No apparent differences in TUNEL immunostaining were observed in lung sections at E18.5 between wild-type and knockout. The pHH3 immunostaining was comparable between wild-type and knockout lungs at E14.5, and the lungs from wild-type at E20.5 showed a high index of positive cells, whereas lungs from knockout showed a apparent reduced staining pattern. Note the dividing cells are mainly epithelial. Original magnification: A-D and G-N are 20X; E, F, O and P are 40X.
15005800	Characterization of type I AECs differentiation. The normal distal saccules of wild-type (+/+) at near term (E20.5) showed typical type I (t1) and type II (t2) epithelial cells (panel A, arrowheads), but knockout (-/-) littermate lungs showed less developed saccules lined by columnar epithelial cells (panel B, black arrowheads), with partially arrested tubules in the distal lung (panel B, green arrowheads). Immunostaining for type I <andsystem-candidate> markers T1α and AQP5 demonstrated an intense staining in flat epithelial cells in wild-type lungs at E20.5 (panels C and E, arrowheads). In contrast, in knockout littermate lungs, T1α and AQP5 staining was dramatically decreased (panels D and F, arrowheads). Megalin expression (Meg) was detected in the airway epithelial cells, but not in proximal bronchiole epithelial cells (data not shown) in the lungs from both wild-type and knockout at E20.5. The elongated megalin-positive epithelial cells, lining the normally developed sacculi, were readily evident in many areas of the wild-type lungs. In contrast, the terminal epithelial cells positively stained by megalin antibodies in knockout lungs were comprised mainly of undifferentiated cuboidal cells (compare the arrowheads in G and H). Original magnification: A, B, G and H are 60X, C-F are 40X.
15005800	There is a close relationship between blood vessel development and lung structural development. At later lung developmental stages, timed capillary bed development is essential for the formation of mature alveolar gas-exchange, with a loss of mesenchyme separating the capillary beds and the AECs [19]. In Dhcr7-/- lungs at late gestational stages, the relative abundance of mesenchyme was consistent with the general arrest in sacculation. To investigate whether the delayed lung sacculation also involved abnormal blood vessel development, immunostaining for the α-isoform of caveolin-1 (cav-1α) and platelet endothelial <andsystem-candidate> adhesion molecular (PECAM-1) were performed on sections from wild-type and Dhcr7-/- lungs. In the developing lung, cav-1α is expressed strictly in the endothelium of developing capillary and blood vessels. Cav-1α is present in the terminally differentiated type I AECs, but is not detectable in its progenitors or type II AECs [33]. At E14.5, both the epithelium and mesenchyme were negative for cav-1α staining, and cav-1α was detected in the developing blood vessels and capillaries, with no differences observed between wild-type and Dhcr7-/- lungs (Fig. 8, panels A and B). Cav-1α immunostaining demonstrated that the vascular development proceeded rapidly during saccular stages in normal lungs (E17.5 and E20.5). In near-term normal lungs (E20.5), an extensive vascular network, associated with markedly thinned septation walls of well-developed alveoli and close apposition to flat type I AECs, was observed (Fig. 8, panels C and E). In contrast, the cav-1α patterns in lungs from Dhcr7-/- embryos revealed a relatively undeveloped pulmonary capillary bed (Fig. 8, panels D and F). At E20.5, cav-1α stained cells in knockout lungs were embedded in a relatively thick mesenchyme surrounding undeveloped epithelial tubules, and these epithelial cells remained cuboidal, instead of flattening out (Fig. 8, panel F). PECAM-1 staining at E20.5 confirmed the delayed lung vascular development at these late gestational stages in Dhcr7 deficient embryos (Fig. 8, cf. panels G and H).
15005800	To further investigate Shh signaling in these embryos, we examined the patterns of expression of Patched (Ptch), a cognate receptor for Shh and one whose expression is also regulated by Shh signaling. The patterns of Ptch in lung sections from various gestational stages were also indistinguishable between wild-type and knockout embryos (Fig. 9, right panels). The expression of Ptch was in concordance with that of Shh (Fig 9, left and right panels), showing lung epithelial <andsystem-candidate> expression. Downstream of the Shh-Ptch signaling cascade are proteins such as smoothened (Smo), and Gli proteins, key regulators of target-gene expression in response to Shh signaling. No differences in expression patterns for Smo (Fig. 10, upper panels), Gli1 (Fig. 10, middle panels) or Gli3 (Fig. 10, bottom panels) were noted between wild-type and knockout lungs at E13.5, E15.5 and E17.5 gestational days.
15005800	Loss of functional Dhcr7 led to a retardation of embryonic growth from E14.5~E16.5 onwards. By this stage, cholesterol levels were already lower and its immediate precursor, 7-DHC, elevated in the lungs (this study) as well as in the whole body [16,17]. Intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) followed by postnatal failure to thrive is a universally observed phenotype in SLOS patients [2,18]. We showed here that body length was significantly reduced at later stages of gestation in Dhcr7-/- animals, compared to controls. Whole body weights and fresh lung weights (as well as brain, heart and kidney, data not shown) at late gestational stages were also lower in Dhcr7-/- embryos. Interestingly, the lower lung/body ratios at E18.5 in Dhcr7-/- embryos compared to wild-type suggested a disproportionate inhibition of lung growth than other organs. <andsystem-candidate> proliferation and division in Dhcr7-/- lungs were markedly arrested without apparent increase in cell apoptosis. Therefore, it appears that growth retardation caused by cholesterol deficiency was primarily because of an inhibition of cell growth and proliferation, rather than an increase in cell death.
15005800	Loss of functional Dhcr7 led to a retardation of embryonic growth from E14.5~E16.5 onwards. By this stage, cholesterol levels were already lower and its immediate precursor, 7-DHC, elevated in the lungs (this study) as well as in the whole body [16,17]. Intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) followed by postnatal failure to thrive is a universally observed phenotype in SLOS patients [2,18]. We showed here that body length was significantly reduced at later stages of gestation in Dhcr7-/- animals, compared to controls. Whole body weights and fresh lung weights (as well as brain, heart and kidney, data not shown) at late gestational stages were also lower in Dhcr7-/- embryos. Interestingly, the lower lung/body ratios at E18.5 in Dhcr7-/- embryos compared to wild-type suggested a disproportionate inhibition of lung growth than other organs. Cell proliferation and division in Dhcr7-/- lungs were markedly arrested without apparent increase in <andsystem-candidate> apoptosis. Therefore, it appears that growth retardation caused by cholesterol deficiency was primarily because of an inhibition of cell growth and proliferation, rather than an increase in cell death.
15005800	Changes in <andsystem-candidate> proliferation and division were assessed by proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) IHC, bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation and phosphorylated histone H3 (pHH3) IHC. The PCNA (1:2000) and pHH3-Ser28 (1:200) antibodies were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. For BrdU incorporation, timed pregnant mice at E18.5 were injected intra-peritoneally with 100 μg/gm body weight of BrdU (Sigma, St Louis, MO) 2 h prior to sacrifice, embryos dissected from uteri and processed as described above. Sections were stained with a monoclonal anti-BrdU antibody (1:100, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, Iowa City, IA) and visualized with a Cy2-conjugated rabbit anti-mouse antibody using a laser-scanning confocal microscope. Cell death was investigated by terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) using the Fluorescein In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit (Roche, Indianapolis, IN) according to the manufacturer's protocol.
15005800	Changes in cell proliferation and division were assessed by proliferating cell nuclear antigen (<andsystem-candidate>) IHC, bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation and phosphorylated histone H3 (pHH3) IHC. The PCNA (1:2000) and pHH3-Ser28 (1:200) antibodies were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. For BrdU incorporation, timed pregnant mice at E18.5 were injected intra-peritoneally with 100 μg/gm body weight of BrdU (Sigma, St Louis, MO) 2 h prior to sacrifice, embryos dissected from uteri and processed as described above. Sections were stained with a monoclonal anti-BrdU antibody (1:100, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, Iowa City, IA) and visualized with a Cy2-conjugated rabbit anti-mouse antibody using a laser-scanning confocal microscope. Cell death was investigated by terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) using the Fluorescein In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit (Roche, Indianapolis, IN) according to the manufacturer's protocol.
15005800	Changes in cell proliferation and division were assessed by proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) IHC, bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation and phosphorylated histone H3 (pHH3) IHC. The PCNA (1:2000) and pHH3-Ser28 (1:200) antibodies were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. For BrdU incorporation, timed pregnant mice at E18.5 were injected intra-peritoneally with 100 μg/gm body weight of BrdU (Sigma, St Louis, MO) 2 h prior to sacrifice, embryos dissected from uteri and processed as described above. Sections were stained with a monoclonal anti-BrdU antibody (1:100, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, Iowa City, IA) and visualized with a Cy2-conjugated rabbit anti-mouse antibody using a laser-scanning confocal microscope. <andsystem-candidate> death was investigated by terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) using the Fluorescein In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit (Roche, Indianapolis, IN) according to the manufacturer's protocol.
15630473	In a common theme of organogenesis, certain cells within a multipotent epithelial sheet exchange signals with their neighbors and develop into a bud structure. Using hair bud morphogenesis as a paradigm, we employed mutant mouse models and cultured keratinocytes to dissect the contributions of multiple extracellular cues in orchestrating adhesion dynamics and proliferation to shape the cluster of cells involved. We found that transforming growth factor β2 signaling is necessary to transiently induce the transcription factor Snail and activate the Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in the bud. In the epidermis, Snail misexpression leads to hyperproliferation and a reduction in intercellular adhesion. When E-cadherin is transcriptionally down-regulated, associated adhesion proteins with dual functions in signaling are released from <andsystem-candidate>-cell contacts, a process which we demonstrate leads to Ras-MAPK activation. These studies provide insights into how multipotent cells within a sheet are stimulated to undergo transcriptional changes that result in proliferation, junctional remodeling, and bud formation. This novel signaling pathway further weaves together the web of different morphogens and downstream transcriptional events that guide hair bud formation within the developing skin.
15630473	At the helm of these molecular communication pathways are Wnts, bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs), transforming growth factor βs (TGF-βs), and fibroblast growth factors (FGFs). Through activation of <andsystem-candidate> surface transmembrane receptors, these external signaling molecules trigger distinct cascades of intracellular events that culminate in changes in gene expression, growth, and differentiation [2]. How this constellation of signals collaborates in tailoring each budding process so that it executes a distinct morphogenetic program has yet to be comprehensively defined. However, the process appears to be patterned at the initial stages of bud formation, since the relative importance of these pathways and their downstream effectors differ as buds begin to develop and cell fates are specified.
15630473	The development of a bud requires a number of coordinated changes in the behavior of the targeted cells within an epithelial sheet. The process must be accompanied by alterations in the proliferation, polarity, shape, and adhesiveness of selected cells, as well as by modifications in their underlying basal lamina. Thus, extracellular epithelial-mesenchymal crosstalk must be intricately orchestrated to couple the determination of distinct <andsystem-candidate> fates with the contemporaneous remodeling of the physical and structural properties of the cell.
15630473	Previously, we delineated how two respective epithelial and mesenchymal signals, Wnts and the BMP-inhibitory factor noggin, function in concert to induce lymphoid enhancer factor-1/β-catenin (LEF-1/β-catenin)-mediated gene transcription within the follicle placode [4]. The downstream changes elicited through convergence of these two early signaling pathways include down-regulation of the gene encoding E-cadherin, the prototypical epithelial cadherin that forms the transmembrane core of intercellular adherens junctions (<andsystem-candidate>) [5]. We subsequently showed that when E-cadherin is transgenically elevated in mouse skin, hair follicle morphogenesis is blocked, suggesting that E-cadherin down-regulation is a critical event in governing the adhesion dynamics necessary for budding morphogenesis [4]. Like LEF-1, E-cadherin also binds to β-catenin. At sites of cell-cell contact, however, E-cadherin-β-catenin complexes recruit α-catenin, which in turn coordinates the associated actin polymerization dynamics necessary to stabilize nascent AJs and integrate the cytoskeleton across an epithelial sheet [6,7,8]. α-Catenin also binds to the class III Lin-1, Isl-1, Mec-3 (LIM) protein Ajuba (a member of the zyxin family of proteins), which appears to function dually in both adhesion and in activation of the Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway [9,10]. Through these links, AJs appear able to couple adhesion with cytoskeletal dynamics as well as with nuclear and cytoplasmic signaling. This provides a framework for conceptualizing why E-cadherin levels appear to impact upon a plethora of developmental processes (reviewed in [11]).
15630473	Previously, we delineated how two respective epithelial and mesenchymal signals, Wnts and the BMP-inhibitory factor noggin, function in concert to induce lymphoid enhancer factor-1/β-catenin (LEF-1/β-catenin)-mediated gene transcription within the follicle placode [4]. The downstream changes elicited through convergence of these two early signaling pathways include down-regulation of the gene encoding E-cadherin, the prototypical epithelial cadherin that forms the transmembrane core of intercellular adherens junctions (AJs) [5]. We subsequently showed that when E-cadherin is transgenically elevated in mouse skin, hair follicle morphogenesis is blocked, suggesting that E-cadherin down-regulation is a critical event in governing the adhesion dynamics necessary for budding morphogenesis [4]. Like LEF-1, E-cadherin also binds to β-catenin. At sites of <andsystem-candidate>-cell contact, however, E-cadherin-β-catenin complexes recruit α-catenin, which in turn coordinates the associated actin polymerization dynamics necessary to stabilize nascent AJs and integrate the cytoskeleton across an epithelial sheet [6,7,8]. α-Catenin also binds to the class III Lin-1, Isl-1, Mec-3 (LIM) protein Ajuba (a member of the zyxin family of proteins), which appears to function dually in both adhesion and in activation of the Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway [9,10]. Through these links, AJs appear able to couple adhesion with cytoskeletal dynamics as well as with nuclear and cytoplasmic signaling. This provides a framework for conceptualizing why E-cadherin levels appear to impact upon a plethora of developmental processes (reviewed in [11]).
15630473	In the present study, we discovered that Snail is expressed briefly at an early stage of hair bud formation, when E-cadherin down-regulation and activation of proliferation take place. Thereafter, Snail disappears and remains absent during subsequent follicle down-growth and maturation. This exquisite pattern appears to be functionally relevant since altering it in vivo correspondingly affects features associated with hair bud formation, including down-regulation of E-cadherin, increased proliferation, and repressed terminal differentiation. Although the temporal spike of Snail in the hair bud is reflected at the mRNA level and seems to follow Wnt signaling and BMP inhibition, LEF-1/β-catenin activation does not appear to induce Snail gene expression in embryonic skin keratinocytes. In contrast, we provide in vitro, transgenic (Tg), and gene targeting evidence to show that TGF-β2 and small phenotype– and mothers against decapentaplegic–related protein 2 (SMAD2) signaling are upstream inducers of Snail gene expression in skin epithelium. In the absence of TGF-β2 signaling and Snail gene expression, hair placodes can form, but further follicle down-growth is blocked. Our studies point to the view that Snail likely functions downstream of <andsystem-candidate> fate specification, at a stage where the bud begins to exhibit enhanced proliferation and migration.
15630473	To determine whether this transient nature of Snail mRNA expression is reflected at the protein level, we generated an antibody against the N-terminal sequence that resides upstream of the more conserved zinc finger domains. As judged by Western blot analysis, the antibody did not detect endogenous proteins from cultured keratinocytes, but it did yield a band of the expected size from keratinocytes transiently expressing a hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged Snail protein (Figure 1B). The antibody also recognized a band corresponding to the size of endogenous Snail (approximately 28 kDa) in lysates from embryonic mouse skin, the temporal appearance of which corresponded to the waves of hair follicle morphogenesis from E15.5 to newborn when over 90% of the hair on the mouse is formed (Figure 1B). Consistent with the Western blot data, immunohistochemical analysis did not detect Snail in single-layered E13.5 epidermis (Figure 1C) nor in the placode, which is the earliest morphological sign of the commitment of multipotent cells of the embryonic ectoderm to a hair <andsystem-candidate> fate (Figure 1D). Consistent with the in situ hybridization results, anti-Snail antibody labeled only hair buds and not follicles at more mature stages of development (Figure 1E). Taken together, the anti-Snail antibody appeared to be specific for its target protein. It did not detect other Snail family members known to be expressed in keratinocytes and/or skin (unpublished data). Furthermore, the immunohistochemical data paralleled our Snail in situ hybridization data revealing transient Snail expression at the hair bud stage (Figure 1A).
15630473	The striking spike of Snail expression coincident with hair bud formation and enhanced proliferation prompted us to examine the consequences of ectopically expressing Snail elsewhere in mouse skin epidermis. To distinguish Tg from endogenous Snail, we used the HA-epitope, shown previously not to alter Snail's transcriptional activity [12]. Of 20 K14-Snail[HA] Tg animals generated, three expressed the transgene and all exhibited analogous phenotypes. Mice that integrated the transgene at the single-<andsystem-candidate> stage died at or shortly after birth. The three surviving full-Tg founder mice harbored transgene integrations that gave stable transmission of mosaic Snail gene expression through the germline. Progressively poor health necessitated our sacrificing most offspring from these lines within a year of birth.
15630473	Given that the E-cadherin promoter is a direct target for Snail-mediated repression in vitro [4,12,13], and that E-cadherin was down-regulated in Snail-expressing hair buds, we examined the status of E-cadherin and other <andsystem-candidate> proteins within regions of hyperproliferative epidermis where Tg Snail was present (Figure 4A). In these regions, immunofluorescence staining of E-cadherin and α-catenin were markedly diminished. In contrast, the intensity of antibody staining for two other AJ proteins, β-catenin and Ajuba, was still strong. Interestingly, however, despite appreciable immunofluorescence, localization of β-catenin and Ajuba appeared to be largely cytoplasmic rather than at cell-cell borders (Figure 4A insets).
15630473	Given that the E-cadherin promoter is a direct target for Snail-mediated repression in vitro [4,12,13], and that E-cadherin was down-regulated in Snail-expressing hair buds, we examined the status of E-cadherin and other AJ proteins within regions of hyperproliferative epidermis where Tg Snail was present (Figure 4A). In these regions, immunofluorescence staining of E-cadherin and α-catenin were markedly diminished. In contrast, the intensity of antibody staining for two other AJ proteins, β-catenin and Ajuba, was still strong. Interestingly, however, despite appreciable immunofluorescence, localization of β-catenin and Ajuba appeared to be largely cytoplasmic rather than at <andsystem-candidate>-cell borders (Figure 4A insets).
15630473	A priori, the decrease in α-catenin levels could be due to either direct transcriptional repression by Snail or perturbations in <andsystem-candidate> formation caused by the decrease in E-cadherin gene expression. To distinguish between these possibilities, we tested whether α-catenin levels could be restored by exogenous expression of E-cadherin in Snail-expressing keratinocytes. As shown in Figure 4C, transiently transfected keratinocytes expressing HA-tagged Snail displayed a loss of E-cadherin and α-catenin at cell-cell borders. Coexpression of exogenous HA-tagged E-cadherin not only enabled cell-cell border localization of E-cadherin protein, but also rescued the cell-cell border staining of α-catenin (Figure 4C). The ability to restore α-catenin expression and localization under these conditions argues against the notion that Snail transcriptionally represses α-catenin. Rather, the findings are consistent with a previous report that E-cadherin is required for the translation of α-catenin mRNA [22].
15630473	A priori, the decrease in α-catenin levels could be due to either direct transcriptional repression by Snail or perturbations in AJ formation caused by the decrease in E-cadherin gene expression. To distinguish between these possibilities, we tested whether α-catenin levels could be restored by exogenous expression of E-cadherin in Snail-expressing keratinocytes. As shown in Figure 4C, transiently transfected keratinocytes expressing HA-tagged Snail displayed a loss of E-cadherin and α-catenin at <andsystem-candidate>-cell borders. Coexpression of exogenous HA-tagged E-cadherin not only enabled cell-cell border localization of E-cadherin protein, but also rescued the cell-cell border staining of α-catenin (Figure 4C). The ability to restore α-catenin expression and localization under these conditions argues against the notion that Snail transcriptionally represses α-catenin. Rather, the findings are consistent with a previous report that E-cadherin is required for the translation of α-catenin mRNA [22].
15630473	Despite the reductions in <andsystem-candidate> markers, Tg skin still displayed sealed membranes and intercellular junctions that were largely intact, as judged by ultrastructural analyses (unpublished data). In this respect, the skin epithelium resembled that of the hair bud, where the down-regulation in junction proteins is permissive for cell-cell remodeling without abrogating intercellular adhesion.
15630473	Despite the reductions in AJ markers, Tg skin still displayed sealed membranes and intercellular junctions that were largely intact, as judged by ultrastructural analyses (unpublished data). In this respect, the skin epithelium resembled that of the hair bud, where the down-regulation in junction proteins is permissive for <andsystem-candidate>-cell remodeling without abrogating intercellular adhesion.
15630473	The similarities between Snail Tg epidermis and hair buds extended to the hyperproliferative state, leading us to wonder whether the down-regulation of <andsystem-candidate> proteins might contribute to this condition. Given the increase in pMAPK staining in Snail Tg epidermis (see Figure 2G), we used pMAPK levels as our assay to test whether the loss of E-cadherin contributed to the Snail-mediated increase in proliferation. Consistent with our in vivo observations, transfected keratinocytes expressing Snail exhibited a substantial increase in pMAPK levels relative to control cells (Figure 4D). Coexpression of E-cadherin with Snail appeared to abrogate this effect. Together, these findings raised the possibility that an AJ-associated protein that is normally sequestered at the plasma membrane may participate in a proliferation signaling pathway when AJs are deconstructed.
15630473	The similarities between Snail Tg epidermis and hair buds extended to the hyperproliferative state, leading us to wonder whether the down-regulation of AJ proteins might contribute to this condition. Given the increase in pMAPK staining in Snail Tg epidermis (see Figure 2G), we used pMAPK levels as our assay to test whether the loss of E-cadherin contributed to the Snail-mediated increase in proliferation. Consistent with our in vivo observations, transfected keratinocytes expressing Snail exhibited a substantial increase in pMAPK levels relative to control cells (Figure 4D). Coexpression of E-cadherin with Snail appeared to abrogate this effect. Together, these findings raised the possibility that an AJ-associated protein that is normally sequestered at the plasma membrane may participate in a proliferation signaling pathway when <andsystem-candidate> are deconstructed.
15630473	Numerous studies have correlated a down-regulation of E-cadherin with a translocation of β-catenin to the nucleus and a transactivation of genes that are regulated by the LEF-1/T <andsystem-candidate> factor (TCF) family of DNA binding proteins [23,24,25]. The presence of nuclear cyclin D in hyperproliferative Snail Tg epidermis was particularly intriguing since prior studies have reported cyclin D gene as a direct target of TCF/β-catenin transcription [26]. This said, we did not detect nuclear β-catenin in our Tg epidermis, and mating the Snail Tg mice against the TOPGal reporter mouse [20] gave no signs of ectopic LEF-1/Tcf/β-catenin activity (unpublished data).
15630473	Ajuba's pre-LIM domain is the segment that associates with Grb-2's Src-homology 3 domain [9]. When this domain was overexpressed in serum-starved keratinocytes, a comparable elevation in pMAPK was observed (Figure 4F). As expected, the small peptide inhibitor that interrupts the Grb-2/Sos association blocked the effects. These data suggested that by elevating cytosolic Ajuba levels, Ajuba's pre-LIM domain may associate with Grb-2/Sos in a manner that stimulates its nucleotide exchange activity and leads to activation of the Ras-MAPK pathway. Although this pathway provides one mechanism by which Snail expression and proliferation may be coupled in skin epithelium, proliferative circuitries involving <andsystem-candidate> are known to be complex and often interwoven. Future studies will be needed to systematically dissect these putative intricacies at a molecular level.
15630473	The temporal spike of Snail mRNA expression in the hair bud prompted us to consider what factor(s) may be regulating the Snail gene. A variety of extracellular signals have an impact on the <andsystem-candidate> type-specific expression of different Snail family members, and many of them, including Wnts, BMPs, FGFs, and TGF-βs, also affect hair bud development [2,16,28]. Since Snail is not expressed in cultured skin keratinocytes that secrete active BMPs and FGFs (see Figure 1B), we focused our attention on Wnt and TGF-β signaling as more likely candidates for Snail induction in this cell type.
15630473	TGF-β1 has been shown to induce Snail family members in hepatocytes and heart [15, 31]. In keratinocytes, however, TGF-β1 inhibits keratinocyte growth and seems to be involved in triggering the destructive phase of the cycling hair follicle [32]. Of the loss-of-function mutations generated in each of the TGF-β genes, only the TGF-β2 null state blocked follicle development at the hair bud stage [32]. Thus, we turned towards addressing whether TGF-β2 might be involved in regulating Snail expression in keratinocytes isolated from the basal layer of the epidermis. Though there is no <andsystem-candidate> culture system available to specifically study placodal cells, these keratinocytes are their progenitors and are the closest approximation available to study the behavior of epithelial cells of the placode.
15630473	TGF-βs are known to promote withdrawal of keratinocytes from the <andsystem-candidate> cycle [41]. Hence, when TGF-β2 protein was detected at the transition between the growing and destructive phases of the adult hair cycle, research initially and naturally focused on a role for this family member in cessation of growth and/or triggering apoptosis ([42] and references therein). However, in contrast to TGF-β1-null skin, which exhibits an extended growing phase of postnatal hair follicles, TGF-β2-null skin displays an embryonic block in follicle bud progression [32]. Although this phenotype is consistent with TGF-β2's embryonic expression patterns [33], about 50% of TGF-β2 null buds appear unable to progress to the down-growth phase, a feature that cannot be explained readily on the basis of previously established effects of TGF-βs.
15630473	Our finding that TGF-β2 is upstream from Ki67 expression and MAPK activation lends further support to the notion that hair follicle keratinocytes at this early stage of development react to TGF-β2 signaling in a fashion opposite to that typically expected for TGF-β factors. This said, based upon pSMAD2 immunohistochemistry, the immediate steps of downstream signaling appeared to be intact. Thus, we surmise that the proliferative outcome is likely to be rooted in differences in the repertoire of activated SMAD target genes. In this regard, the positive effects of TGF-β2 on proliferation within the hair bud may be more analogous to what has been seen in progression of squamous <andsystem-candidate> carcinoma to metastatic carcinoma [43] rather than that typically observed for keratinocytes [44,45,46].
15630473	At first glance, the sparsity in hair coat of K14-Snail Tg mice seemed indicative of a defect in follicle formation (see Figure 2A). Closer inspection, however, revealed that not all hairs penetrated the hyperthickened Tg epidermis. Several factors may contribute to the seemingly normal follicle development in these mice. One obvious factor is the K14 promoter, which is elevated in the basal layer of the epidermis and the outer root sheath (ORS) of the hair follicle, but is markedly down-regulated in developing embryonic hair buds as well as in the postnatal hair progenitor cells. The K14 promoter is also less active in the ORS than epidermis and hence this might also account for the lack of apparent response of the ORS to ectopic Snail. Additional contributing factors could be the multiplicity of Snail family members and their differential expression, the saturation, and/or diversity of regulatory mechanisms that govern <andsystem-candidate> formation, migration, and proliferation in the follicle ORS. Distinguishing between these possibilities must await the generation of mice harboring skin-specific loss-of-function Snail mutations.
15630473	Our Tg studies suggested that, at least in part through its regulation of E-cadherin, Snail is able to influence the subcellular localization of a variety of <andsystem-candidate>-associated proteins. One of these appears to be Ajuba, which was previously shown to have the dual capacity to bind Grb-2 as well as α-catenin [9,10]. Our studies revealed that in skin keratinocytes that either harbor a conditional null mutation in α-catenin or that overexpress Snail, Ajuba develops an interaction with Grb-2 that is otherwise not observed in WT keratinocytes. The corresponding abilities of either Snail-transfected or Ajuba-transfected keratinocytes to exhibit elevated activation of the Ras-MAPK pathway suggest that the Grb-2 association of Ajuba under conditions of reduced levels of AJ proteins may be directly relevant to the parallel in hyperproliferation.
15630473	In stable epithelial (i.e., Madin-Darby canine kidney, or MDCK) <andsystem-candidate> lines, Snail has been shown to block cell cycle progression and promote motility and shape changes for invasion [47]. While our in vivo studies are consistent with a role for Snail in motility and epithelial remodeling, they differ with respect to Snail's apparent proliferative effects. A priori, this could be simply due to variations in the response of different cell types to Snail expression. Alternatively, these differences may be relevant to the benefit of using mouse models to reveal functions not always recapitulated in stable cell line models. Future studies should highlight the underlying reasons for these opposing results.
15630473	Irrespective of these differences, our in vivo studies do not stand alone, as there are many situations in which a down-regulation in <andsystem-candidate> proteins correlate with enhanced proliferation. In fact, a myriad of diverse mechanisms have been implicated in activating epithelial proliferation upon down-regulation of AJ proteins [7,23,24,48]. Sifting through these converging pathways is likely to be a difficult and painstaking process. This said, by identifying the status of different players involved in specific cell types and at specific stages in development, our mechanistic understanding of how intercellular remodeling is linked to proliferation in epithelial morphogenesis should begin to surface in the future. Elucidating the molecular mechanisms through which these networks converge is also a prerequisite for understanding how these processes go awry during tumorigenesis.
15630473	Irrespective of these differences, our in vivo studies do not stand alone, as there are many situations in which a down-regulation in AJ proteins correlate with enhanced proliferation. In fact, a myriad of diverse mechanisms have been implicated in activating epithelial proliferation upon down-regulation of AJ proteins [7,23,24,48]. Sifting through these converging pathways is likely to be a difficult and painstaking process. This said, by identifying the status of different players involved in specific <andsystem-candidate> types and at specific stages in development, our mechanistic understanding of how intercellular remodeling is linked to proliferation in epithelial morphogenesis should begin to surface in the future. Elucidating the molecular mechanisms through which these networks converge is also a prerequisite for understanding how these processes go awry during tumorigenesis.
15630473	Primary antibodies used were against: E-cadherin (M. Takeichi, Kyoto University, Japan); α-catenin, β-catenin, pMAPK, tubulin (Sigma, St. Louis, Missouri, United States), Ajuba (G. Longmore, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, United States); β4 integrin/CD104 (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, California, United States), laminin 5 (R. Burgeson, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States), K5, K1, loricrin (Fuchs Lab), involucrin, fillagrin (Covance, Berkeley, California, United States), MAPK, pSMAD2 (<andsystem-candidate> Signaling, Beverly, Massachusetts, United States); Grb-2 (Santa Cruz Biotech, Santa Cruz, California, United States); P-cadherin (Zymed Laboratories, South San Francisco, California, United States); HA (Roche Biochemicals), vimentin (Chemicon, Temecula, California, United States), Ki67 (Novo Castra, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom), keratin 6 (P. Coulombe, John Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, United States), cyclin D (Oncogene, San Diego, California, United States), and TGF-β2 (L. Gold, New York University, New York, New York, United States). FITC-, Texas Red-, or HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies were from Jackson ImmunoResearch (West Grove, Pennsylvania, United States). Biotinylated secondary antibodies were from Vector Labs (Burlingame, California, United States). Dilutions were according to the manufacturer's recommendation. The Snail antibody was generated in Guinea pigs by inoculating them with the N-terminal sequence of murine Snail fused to GST (Covance, Princeton, New Jersey, United States). Recombinant human TGF-β2 was purchased from R&D (Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States). Heat inactivated TGF-β2 was generated by heating the recombinant protein at 100 °C for 10 min.
15630473	Protein extracts from primary keratinocytes were generated either by lysing cells in lysis buffer (1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 20 mM Tris-Cl [pH 7.4], 140 mM NaCl containing 1 mM sodium vanadate, 2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and protease inhibitors) or directly in Laemmli bβuffer and boiled. For skin tissue: Frozen tissue was pulverized in a liquid nitrogen-cooled Gevebesmascher and the powder scraped into a chilled microcentrifuge tube. RIPA buffer (1% Triton X-100 in PBS with 10 mM EDTA, 150 mN NaCl, 1% sodium deoxycholate, and 0.1% SDS) and protease inhibitors or Laemmli buffer was added. The <andsystem-candidate> suspension was sonicated three times for 15 s and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm at 4 °C. The supernatant was separated from the pellet and used in the experiments. Extracts subjected to immunoprecipitation were precleared with Protein G Sepharose (Amersham, Piscataway, New York, United States) and incubated with antibody with rocking overnight at 4 °C. Protein G Sepharose was added and samples were incubated for 1 h at 4 °C with rocking. Samples were washed three times for 5 min each in lysis buffer, and the Protein G Sepharose-antibody-antigen pellet was resuspended in Laemmli buffer and boiled for 10 min. Samples were run on SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane (Schleicher and Schuell Bioscience, Keene, New Hampshire, United States). Western blot signals were developed using the enhanced chemiluminescence kit from Amersham
15630473	(H) Immunofluorescence with anti-laminin 5 (<andsystem-candidate>), which demarcates the basement membrane, and anti-E-cadherin (E-cad), a component of AJs. At the leading edge of the growing bud, cell-cell borders show markedly diminished anti-E-cadherin labeling (arrowheads).
15630473	(H) Immunofluorescence with anti-laminin 5 (lam5), which demarcates the basement membrane, and anti-E-cadherin (E-cad), a component of <andsystem-candidate>. At the leading edge of the growing bud, cell-cell borders show markedly diminished anti-E-cadherin labeling (arrowheads).
15630473	(H) Immunofluorescence with anti-laminin 5 (lam5), which demarcates the basement membrane, and anti-E-cadherin (E-cad), a component of AJs. At the leading edge of the growing bud, <andsystem-candidate>-cell borders show markedly diminished anti-E-cadherin labeling (arrowheads).
15630473	(A) Immunofluorescence of skin sections from P30 Wt and Tg mice. Shown are affected areas of Tg skin; in areas where Snail protein was not expressed, stainings were normal. Antibodies used are against <andsystem-candidate> proteins and include E-cadherin (E-cad), the transmembrane core protein; β-catenin (β-cat), which binds E-cadherin at AJs and which can also participate as a transcription cofactor when associated with LEF-1/TCF proteins in the nucleus; α-catenin (α-cat) which binds to both β-catenin and Ajuba, a close relative of zyxin; and Ajuba, which can associate with proteins that bind to the actin cytoskeleton, as well as with Grb-2, a mediator of the GTP nucleotide-exchange protein Sos, involved in activation of the Ras-MAPK signaling cascade. In Snail-expressing Tg regions, there was a reduced staining with anti-E-cad and anti-α-cat and a more diffuse staining with anti-Ajuba. Insets in the panels for β-catenin and Ajuba staining are magnified views of the boxed areas. Arrows mark membrane localization of the protein and asterisks mark cells with elevated levels of cytoplasmic β-catenin or Ajuba.
15630473	(A) Immunofluorescence of skin sections from P30 Wt and Tg mice. Shown are affected areas of Tg skin; in areas where Snail protein was not expressed, stainings were normal. Antibodies used are against AJ proteins and include E-cadherin (E-cad), the transmembrane core protein; β-catenin (β-cat), which binds E-cadherin at <andsystem-candidate> and which can also participate as a transcription cofactor when associated with LEF-1/TCF proteins in the nucleus; α-catenin (α-cat) which binds to both β-catenin and Ajuba, a close relative of zyxin; and Ajuba, which can associate with proteins that bind to the actin cytoskeleton, as well as with Grb-2, a mediator of the GTP nucleotide-exchange protein Sos, involved in activation of the Ras-MAPK signaling cascade. In Snail-expressing Tg regions, there was a reduced staining with anti-E-cad and anti-α-cat and a more diffuse staining with anti-Ajuba. Insets in the panels for β-catenin and Ajuba staining are magnified views of the boxed areas. Arrows mark membrane localization of the protein and asterisks mark cells with elevated levels of cytoplasmic β-catenin or Ajuba.
15630473	(C) In the presence of elevated Snail, α-catenin levels can be restored by overexpression of E-cadherin. Keratinocytes were transfected with either HA-tagged Snail (Snail[HA]; images on the left) or Snail(HA) and Ecad(HA) (images on the right). 2 d after transfection, cells were switched from low-calcium growth medium to high-calcium medium for 6 h to induce <andsystem-candidate> formation. Cells were stained with antibodies as indicated on the panels. Arrowheads point to sites of intercellular contact between a Snail-transfected keratinocyte and its neighboring untransfected cell.
15630473	(C) In the presence of elevated Snail, α-catenin levels can be restored by overexpression of E-cadherin. Keratinocytes were transfected with either HA-tagged Snail (Snail[HA]; images on the left) or Snail(HA) and Ecad(HA) (images on the right). 2 d after transfection, cells were switched from low-calcium growth medium to high-calcium medium for 6 h to induce AJ formation. Cells were stained with antibodies as indicated on the panels. Arrowheads point to sites of intercellular contact between a Snail-transfected keratinocyte and its neighboring untransfected <andsystem-candidate>.
15630473	(D) Reintroduction of E-cadherin in keratinocytes expressing Snail returns pMAPK to basal levels. Keratinocytes were transfected with control vector (K14), or Snail(HA), or Snail(HA) + E-cad(HA). After 2 d, cells were serum starved for 4 h and whole <andsystem-candidate> lysates were made and Western blotted with antibodies to pMAPK, HA to recognize the HA-tagged Snail and E-cadherin protein, 20or tubulin as a loading control.
15630473	(E) Ajuba interacts with Grb-2 under conditions where α-catenin levels are reduced. Protein extracts were made from skins of P30 Wt and K14-Snail Tg P30 mice (blots on the left) and of newborn Wt and K14-Cre/α-catenin (fl/fl) conditionally null animals (blots on the right) [7]. Equal amounts of protein extracts were treated with anti-Grb-2 antibody (+) or control isotype antibody (–), and following centrifugation, immunoprecipitates were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis with anti-Ajuba and anti-Grb-2 antibodies. Note the presence of Ajuba only under conditions where levels of α-catenin and other <andsystem-candidate> proteins were aberrantly low or absent.
15917436	Helicases play central roles in initiation and elongation of DNA replication. We previously reported that helicase and ATPase activities of the mammalian Mcm4/6/7 complex are activated specifically by thymine-rich single-stranded DNA. Here, we examined its substrate preference and helicase actions using various synthetic DNAs. On a bubble substrate, Mcm4/6/7 makes symmetric dual contacts with the 5′-proximal 25 nt single-stranded segments adjacent to the branch points, presumably generating double hexamers. Loss of thymine residues from one single-strand results in significant decrease of unwinding efficacy, suggesting that concurrent bidirectional unwinding by a single double hexameric Mcm4/6/7 may play a role in efficient unwinding of the bubble. Mcm4/6/7 binds and unwinds various <andsystem-candidate> and extension structures carrying a single-stranded 3′-tail DNA. The extent of helicase activation depends on the sequence context of the 3′-tail, and the maximum level is achieved by DNA with 50% or more thymine content. Strand displacement by Mcm4/6/7 is inhibited, as the GC content of the duplex region increases. Replacement of cytosine–guanine pairs with cytosine–inosine pairs in the duplex restored unwinding, suggesting that mammalian Mcm4/6/7 helicase has difficulties in unwinding stably base-paired duplex. Taken together, these findings reveal important features on activation and substrate preference of the eukaryotic replicative helicase.
15917436	All the six <andsystem-candidate> 2–7 proteins contain highly conserved DNA-dependent ATPase motifs in their central regions (15,16). Among the several stable subcomplexes which MCM proteins can generate, only the Mcm4/6/7 complex has been shown to possess an intrinsic DNA helicase activity (10–14,17–18). While Mcm4, Mcm6 and Mcm7 proteins make distinct contribution to its helicase activity (11–13), Mcm2 or Mcm3/5 inhibit the helicase activity of the Mcm4/6/7 complex by converting its double trimer structure into a heterotetramer or heteropentamer, respectively (3,11). Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays and genetic characterization in Saccharomyces cerevisiae strongly suggested that Mcm is involved not only in initiation but also in the DNA chain elongation stage as a replicative helicase (19,20). Consistent with this notion, the processivity of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe and mouse Mcm4/6/7 complexes is significantly stimulated on forked DNA structures and it can unwind duplex DNA of 400–500 bp (13,14). Mcm4/6/7 binds to fork and bubble structures in an ATP-dependent manner, and generates a double-hexameric complex, as was shown for T-antigen (13,14,21). Recently, we reported that the helicase and ATP hydrolysis activities of mammalian Mcm4/6/7 are specifically activated by single-stranded DNA containing stretches of thymine residues and proposed a novel model that Mcm may play a crucial role in selection of replication origins in higher eukaryotes (13).
15917436	All the six Mcm 2–7 proteins contain highly conserved DNA-dependent ATPase motifs in their central regions (15,16). Among the several stable subcomplexes which <andsystem-candidate> proteins can generate, only the Mcm4/6/7 complex has been shown to possess an intrinsic DNA helicase activity (10–14,17–18). While Mcm4, Mcm6 and Mcm7 proteins make distinct contribution to its helicase activity (11–13), Mcm2 or Mcm3/5 inhibit the helicase activity of the Mcm4/6/7 complex by converting its double trimer structure into a heterotetramer or heteropentamer, respectively (3,11). Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays and genetic characterization in Saccharomyces cerevisiae strongly suggested that Mcm is involved not only in initiation but also in the DNA chain elongation stage as a replicative helicase (19,20). Consistent with this notion, the processivity of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe and mouse Mcm4/6/7 complexes is significantly stimulated on forked DNA structures and it can unwind duplex DNA of 400–500 bp (13,14). Mcm4/6/7 binds to fork and bubble structures in an ATP-dependent manner, and generates a double-hexameric complex, as was shown for T-antigen (13,14,21). Recently, we reported that the helicase and ATP hydrolysis activities of mammalian Mcm4/6/7 are specifically activated by single-stranded DNA containing stretches of thymine residues and proposed a novel model that Mcm may play a crucial role in selection of replication origins in higher eukaryotes (13).
15917436	Labeled and unlabeled dNTPs/rNTPs and Sequenase were purchased from Amersham Pharmacia. M13mp18 and M13mp19 single-stranded circular DNA, T4 polynucleotide kinase, DNase I and the Klenow fragment were from TAKARA, Nuclease P1 was from Roche, and anti-FLAG M2 <andsystem-candidate> (antibody)-agarose and FLAG peptide were from Sigma. SV40 T-antigen was purified from baculovirus-infected insect cells as reported (22). PriA helicase protein was provided by Dr Taku Tanaka (23). Oligonucleotides were purchased from Hokkaido system science Co., Ltd (Hokkaido, Japan), and were purified on polyacrylamide gel, followed by purification by Sep-Pak Plus C18 cartridge column (Waters).
15917436	The recombinant baculoviruses expressing His6-Mcm4/Mcm6 or Mcm7-FLAG proteins were previously described (11). Sf9 and High five insect cells were cultured at 27°C in Sf-900 II SFM (Life Technologies, Inc.) and EX-<andsystem-candidate> 405 medium (JRH Biosciences), respectively. For expression of the Mcm4/6/7 proteins, High five cells were coinfected with recombinant baculoviruses expressing the His6-Mcm4/Mcm6 proteins and those expressing the Mcm7-FLAG, and were collected at 48 h post-infection. The recombinant Mcm4/6/7 complexes were purified as previously described (12).
15917436	The DNA bubble substrates were assembled from two partially complementary oligonucleotides with top and bottom strand sequences (Table 1). T-tailed Y-<andsystem-candidate> substrates were prepared by annealing two oligonucleotides (dT30 and dT60 series). To construct the arrested fork and 3′- or 5′-extension substrates, various combinations of oligonucleotides shown in Table 1 were annealed. Bub-82/lamin B2 containing the T-rich strand of the lamin B2 origin region was constructed as previously described (13). The bubble substrate, c-myc/DUE or c-myc/DUE-C, contains sequences (GenBank accession number K01908) from nucleotides 722 to 853 or those from 828 to 747 (complementary strand), respectively, in the central melted region. For each substrate, labeled oligonucleotide (3 pmol) was annealed with the unlabeled oligonucleotide (6 pmol) in a reaction mixture (50 μl) containing 20 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM MgCl2 and 25 mM NaCl, which were heated to 95°C, kept at 67°C for 1 h, and then allowed to slowly cool down to 37°C. The assembled substrates were purified from polyacrylamide gel by elution into TE buffer (24).
15917436	Nuclease protection assays were conducted also on a T-tailed Y-fork structure (Figure 1B). Not only the single-stranded tail region but also the 7 bp duplex DNA adjacent to the duplex-to-single-strand junction were protected by <andsystem-candidate> binding from DNaseI digestion. These results indicate that Mcm4/6/7 protein primarily interacts with single-stranded DNA region and that the interaction also spans the duplex segments near the branchpoint of the replication fork.
15917436	In order to examine more precisely the interaction and helicase actions with forked substrates, Y-<andsystem-candidate> substrates containing a nascent leading strand (A-fork[3′]), nascent lagging strand (A-fork[5′]), or both of them (A-fork[3′,5′]), as well as 5′-extension or 3′-extension structures were constructed. Mcm4/6/7 bound to A-fork[3′] or A-fork[5′] with affinity similar to that of a simple Y-fork (Figure 4A and data not shown). In contrast, PriA helicase, used as a control, bound to A-fork[3′] more efficiently than to A-fork[5′], as reported previously (23,25). Mcm4/6/7 bound also to 5′-extension and 3′-extension, albeit with slightly reduced affinity compared to A-fork[3′] and A-fork[5′] (Figure 4A). Mcm4/6/7 bound to A-fork[3′,5′] with much lower affinity, and the complex gave rise to a single band. These findings indicate that the Mcm4/6/7 complex is loaded onto DNA preferentially and efficiently through single-stranded region, regardless of the presence of 3′- or 5′-terminus.
15917436	In contrast, only the substrate containing a 3′ single-stranded DNA tail (A-<andsystem-candidate>[5′]) was efficiently unwound and A-fork[3′] or A-fork[3′,5′], was not unwound by Mcm4/6/7 (Figure 4B). Absence of helicase actions on A-fork[3′,5′] composed only of duplex regions is expected since double-stranded DNA is not able to activate the ATPase activity of Mcm4/6/7 (10). In contrast, the PriA, a structure-specific helicase used as a control, binds at the fork junction and unwinds the fork and the nascent lagging strand DNA on A-fork[5′], or unwinds the nascent lagging strand on A-fork[3′,5′], as reported before (25). These results indicate that the Mcm4/6/7 complex binds to single-stranded DNA and that its helicase is activated only in the presence of a single-stranded 3′-tail.
15917436	It has been reported that the 3′-extension can be unwound by the archaeal <andsystem-candidate> homohexamer but not by fission and budding yeast Mcm complexes (14,26,27). We have constructed 3′-extension substrates containing poly(dT), poly(dA), poly(dC) and poly(dG) 3′-tails in order to examine whether mouse Mcm4/6/7 can displace these substrates. We first found that Mcm4/6/7 binds to dT-, dC- and dG-3′-extension with similar affinity, and to dA-3′-extension with much lower affinity (Figure 5A). This is consistent with the previous results that Mcm4/6/7 binds to 50mer oligo-dT, -dC and -dG, but not to a 50mer oligo-dA (13). We found that dT-tailed 3′-extension was displaced efficiently by Mcm 4/6/7 while almost no or very little activity was detected on other substrates (Figure 5B and C). This is in sharp contrast to yeast Mcm4/6/7 helicases which are not capable of unwinding 3′-extension substrates. Furthermore, dT-tailed 5′-extension, to which Mcm4/6/7 could bind, was not displaced by the Mcm helicase. The addition of the 5′-tail to dT-tailed 3′-extension further stimulated the displacement (Figure 5D), confirming the previous report that the fork structures facilitate the helicase action. Thus, these results further strengthen our conclusion that the mammalian Mcm helicase is generally activated by the thymine-stretch on the 3′-single-stranded tail.
15917436	We next examined more systematically the effect of the compositions of the thymine residues of the 3′-tail on the Mcm helicase activity. A partial heteroduplex M13 single-stranded DNA containing a 37 bp duplex region in the presence or absence of the 50 nt long 3′-tail of various nucleotide compositions were constructed and the unwinding by mouse Mcm4/6/7 was examined (Figure 6A). Due to its low processivity, Mcm4/6/7 barely displaced the annealed 37mer oligonucleotide without a 3′-tail (37mer; Figure 6A). Only weak helicase activity was observed on the substrate carrying the 3′-tail of 25 repeats of TA dinucleotide (37-TA25; Figure 6A), whereas strong helicase activity was observed on 37-TTA17. Increase of thymine content on the 3′-tail did not further increase the extent of unwinding (37-TTTA13, 37-TTTTA10 and 37-T50; Figure 6A), suggesting that 17 repeats of TT dinucleotides (67% thymine) may be sufficient for activation of Mcm helicase. It should be noted that the TA25 tail would self-anneal and this would prevent the loading of <andsystem-candidate>, since the 3′-tail containing TTAA13 or TTTAAA8 did not enhance the unwinding either (data not shown). Therefore, we next examined the effects of repeating sequences of thymine and cytosine (Figure 6B). Partial heteroduplex substrates containing the 3′-tail of TC25, TTCC13, TTTCCC8, TTTTCCCC6, TTCC17 were displaced by the Mcm4/6/7 complex to the extent similar to that achieved by TTA17, suggesting that 50% thymine content is sufficient for full activation of Mcm helicase. TTCC13 and TTCC17 were displaced to a similar extent, consistent with the earlier result that a 40 nt tail is sufficient for activation (13). However, the efficiency of the displacement significantly decreased as the thymine content of the 3′-tail dropped to 33%, as in TAA17 or TCC17 (Figure 6B and C). Thus, the minimal thymine content required for activation of the Mcm helicase may be somewhere between 33 and 50%.
15917436	In gel shift assays, MCM4/6/7 bound to all the three bubbles, although the affinity to Bub82/c-myc/DUE and to Bub82/c-myc/DUE-C is slightly lower than that to Bub-82/lamin B2 (Figure 7B). Therefore, helicase and DNA binding activities do not necessarily correlate with each other. This was also indicated by our previous results that guanine and cytosine stretches can bind to <andsystem-candidate> but cannot activate the helicase (13).
15917436	Our results indicate that thymine-rich single-stranded DNA is required for initial loading and activation of the Mcm helicase. However, it is not known whether thymine sequences are required for processive unwinding of duplex DNA. Therefore, we have examined whether the nucleotide composition of the duplex region affects its unwinding activity. To address this issue, we constructed a series of T-tailed Y-fork structures (T-<andsystem-candidate>) containing various sequences in the duplex segment. They carried varied contents of cytosine residues on the 3′-tail strand. In gel shift assays, Mcm4/6/7 bound to these Y-fork substrates with identical affinity (Figure 8A), consistent with the notion that the Mcm4/6/7 binds to single-stranded tails. However, in DNA helicase assays, T-fork/(C:G)49 was hardly displaced by Mcm4/6/7, but was readily displaced by SV40 T-antigen DNA helicase (Figure 8B). When thymine or adenine is inserted as every third nucleotide (repeats of CCT or CCA), the extent of unwinding increased (T-fork/(CCT:GGA)16 and T-fork/(CCA:GGT)16). The efficiency of unwinding is roughly correlated with the content of GC pairs in the duplex segment [T-fork/(CCAA:GGTT)12, T-fork/(CCTT:GGAA)12, T-fork/(CAAA:GTTT)12 and T-fork/(CTTT:GAAA)12; Figure 8B]. It appears that the duplex segment containing <50% GC pairs is efficiently unwound (Figure 8C).
15917436	We next examined the effect of GC-rich segments on a partial heteroduplex DNA on a single-stranded circular DNA. We have constructed two sets of 5′-tailed partial heteroduplex DNA substrates containing duplex regions of variable lengths; one on M13mp18 vector and the other on M13mp19 containing a 66 nt long G-rich segment downstream of the hybridizing oligonucleotide. We found that the Mcm4/6/7 helicase can displace duplex DNA up to 350 nt long on its own on the former substrate (Figure 8D, left), consistent with previous results (13). In contrast, displacement was inhibited over the GC-rich segments on the latter substrate (Figure 8D, right panel), although displacement up to 250 nt in length, albeit at a reduced level, was observed at a high concentration of Mcm4/6/7 complex. This result is consistent with that on Y-<andsystem-candidate> and indicates that GC-rich duplex segment is inhibitory for unwinding by the Mcm helicase. These results may indicate that the presence of thymine–adenine pairs with a certain frequency in the duplex region may facilitate continuous unwinding by Mcm4/6/7. Alternatively, Mcm4/6/7 is not efficient enough to displace thermodynamically stable GC-base-paired segment.
15917436	In order to distinguish these two possibilities, we designed a new T-<andsystem-candidate> substrate containing inosine (I) residue instead of guanosine residue. The thermal stability of the I:C base pair is lower than that of the G:C base pair in duplex DNA due to loss of one hydrogen bond and is even lower than A:T base pair (31). We constructed the T-tailed fork substrates containing the (GCC:CGG)10, (GCC:CIG)10 or (GAA:CTT)10 duplex DNA segment (Figure 8E). Mcm4/6/7 hardly displaced the 31 nt long duplex of GCC:CGG repeats, whereas the T-fork/(GAA:CTT)10 was displaced efficiently, as described above. T-fork/(GCC:CIG)10 was displaced with efficiency much greater than that of T-fork/(GCC:CGG)10, indicating that the thermostability of the duplex segment, not the lack of AT base pair, is responsible for inability of Mcm4/6/7 to displace the duplex.
15917436	DNA helicase is a central factor for operation of replication forks. It also plays a crucial role in the initiation step at the replication origins. Therefore, the elucidation of how the replicative helicases interact with DNA substrate and how they are activated is crucial for understanding the molecular basis of initiation of DNA replication. It is now believed that <andsystem-candidate> is a major component of the eukaryotic replicative helicase. In this report, we have conducted detailed analyses on binding and helicase actions of mouse Mcm4/6/7 using various substrates including fork and bubble structures.
15917436	Initiation of DNA replication is associated with localized melting of duplex DNA near replication origins. Helicases are loaded onto replication forks through the melted region, induced by initiator binding, in bacteria (32). We previously reported that Mcm4/6/7 can be loaded onto a bubble-like structure and can serve as a DNA helicase at the forks (13). The ability of Mcm4/6/7 to unwind the bubble substrate but not the conventional duplex DNA (Figures 2 and 13) indicates that <andsystem-candidate> can be loaded through the single-stranded segment of the bubble. Furthermore, the Mcm4/6/7 complex displays marked preference for thymine-rich sequences within the single-stranded segment for helicase activation (13). The results in this report indicate that helicase action of Mcm4/6/7 on synthetic bubbles may depend on the presence of an unpaired region of sufficient length (at least 40 nt), which may permit assembly of a double-hexameric complex on the substrate DNA, similar to SV40 T-antigen protein (Figure 2A) (21). When one strand of the single-stranded segment in T-rich bubble was replaced by guanine-rich sequences, the efficiency of unwinding was significantly reduced.
15917436	Our footprinting analyses showed that Mcm4/6/7 strongly protects 25 nt single-stranded DNA segment adjacent to each branch point and proximal to 5′ ends of both strands of the bubble. At each <andsystem-candidate>, one Mcm4/6/7 complex is likely to encircle the single-stranded DNA strand and two hexamers may bind symmetrically to the bubble substrate, forming a double hexameric structure on the bubble (see schematic drawing of Figure 1A). Efficient unwinding into both directions may require simultaneous activation of both hexamers which may sit at the center while extruding the unwound single-stranded DNA through the rings. This may closely resemble the proposed modes of binding and helicase actions of T-antigen (21). Although we cannot totally exclude the possibility that one Mcm4/6/7 hexamer at each fork unwinds the duplex independently, ring-shaped structures of mouse and archea MCM, as revealed by electron microscopy, bear much similarity to the recently solved structure of the SV40 large T-antigen (4,6), and are in favor of the double-hexameric structure of mouse Mcm on a bubble DNA.
15917436	Our footprinting analyses showed that Mcm4/6/7 strongly protects 25 nt single-stranded DNA segment adjacent to each branch point and proximal to 5′ ends of both strands of the bubble. At each fork, one Mcm4/6/7 complex is likely to encircle the single-stranded DNA strand and two hexamers may bind symmetrically to the bubble substrate, forming a double hexameric structure on the bubble (see schematic drawing of Figure 1A). Efficient unwinding into both directions may require simultaneous activation of both hexamers which may sit at the center while extruding the unwound single-stranded DNA through the rings. This may closely resemble the proposed modes of binding and helicase actions of T-antigen (21). Although we cannot totally exclude the possibility that one Mcm4/6/7 hexamer at each fork unwinds the duplex independently, ring-shaped structures of mouse and archea <andsystem-candidate>, as revealed by electron microscopy, bear much similarity to the recently solved structure of the SV40 large T-antigen (4,6), and are in favor of the double-hexameric structure of mouse Mcm on a bubble DNA.
15917436	Our footprinting analyses showed that Mcm4/6/7 strongly protects 25 nt single-stranded DNA segment adjacent to each branch point and proximal to 5′ ends of both strands of the bubble. At each fork, one Mcm4/6/7 complex is likely to encircle the single-stranded DNA strand and two hexamers may bind symmetrically to the bubble substrate, forming a double hexameric structure on the bubble (see schematic drawing of Figure 1A). Efficient unwinding into both directions may require simultaneous activation of both hexamers which may sit at the center while extruding the unwound single-stranded DNA through the rings. This may closely resemble the proposed modes of binding and helicase actions of T-antigen (21). Although we cannot totally exclude the possibility that one Mcm4/6/7 hexamer at each fork unwinds the duplex independently, ring-shaped structures of mouse and archea MCM, as revealed by electron microscopy, bear much similarity to the recently solved structure of the SV40 large T-antigen (4,6), and are in favor of the double-hexameric structure of mouse <andsystem-candidate> on a bubble DNA.
15917436	DNA binding assays indicate that Mcm4/6/7 binds to those substrates containing single-stranded DNA regions regardless of the presence or absence of single-stranded 3′ or 5′ end. Unwinding of the duplex DNA depends on translocation of single-stranded DNA from 3′ to 5′ direction. This is most clearly shown by its helicase action on A-<andsystem-candidate>[5′] and 3′-extension but not on A-fork[3′], A-fork[3′,5′] nor 5′-extension. However, it does not necessarily require 3′ end of single-stranded DNA, since Mcm4/6/7 can displace annealing oligonucleotide on a circular single-stranded DNA. The ability of the mouse Mcm4/6/7 to unwind 3′-extension is shared by the archaeal Mcm helicase but not by Mcm4/6/7 from S.pombe and S.cerevisiae (14,26,27). The archaeal Mcm can unwind A-fork[3′] but eukaryotic Mcm4/6/7 cannot, since the former binds to double-stranded DNA but the latter does not (5,27). While yeast Mcm helicases can translocate on duplex DNA, such activity was not observed with mammalian Mcm4/6/7 (data not shown).
15917436	DNA binding assays indicate that Mcm4/6/7 binds to those substrates containing single-stranded DNA regions regardless of the presence or absence of single-stranded 3′ or 5′ end. Unwinding of the duplex DNA depends on translocation of single-stranded DNA from 3′ to 5′ direction. This is most clearly shown by its helicase action on A-fork[5′] and 3′-extension but not on A-fork[3′], A-fork[3′,5′] nor 5′-extension. However, it does not necessarily require 3′ end of single-stranded DNA, since Mcm4/6/7 can displace annealing oligonucleotide on a circular single-stranded DNA. The ability of the mouse Mcm4/6/7 to unwind 3′-extension is shared by the archaeal Mcm helicase but not by Mcm4/6/7 from S.pombe and S.cerevisiae (14,26,27). The archaeal <andsystem-candidate> can unwind A-fork[3′] but eukaryotic Mcm4/6/7 cannot, since the former binds to double-stranded DNA but the latter does not (5,27). While yeast Mcm helicases can translocate on duplex DNA, such activity was not observed with mammalian Mcm4/6/7 (data not shown).
15917436	Occurrence of AT-rich sequences, with asymmetric distribution of adenine and thymine, near the replication origins, lead us to propose that <andsystem-candidate> may play a role in selection of initiation sites of mammalian DNA replication, and prompted us to examine the ability of sequences from human replication origins to activate Mcm4/6/7 helicase. Both lamin-B2 and c-myc origins served as efficient activator for Mcm helicase in vitro. Consistent with it, site-specific loading of Mcm in the DNA replication initiation zone of the c-myc was recently reported (33).
15917436	We have examined in detail the effect of sequence context of the single-stranded DNA on the helicase activity of <andsystem-candidate>. The results indicate that thymine content of 50% is sufficient for the maximum helicase activity. The efficiency of displacement decreased as the thymine content of the 3′-tail dropped to 33% (Figure 6). The stretches of thymine residues may not be necessarily required, since repeats of TC dinucleotides served as a potent activator for Mcm4/6/7. We also noticed that the presence of a secondary structure within the single-stranded DNA is inhibitory for helicase action. Nuclease footprinting assays indicated that binding was interfered by the secondary structure (data not shown). Thus, we have concluded that Mcm4/6/7 helicase is most efficiently activated by non-structured single-stranded DNA with thymine content of 50% or more, although significant stimulation is observed also by DNA with less thymine content (Figure 7), suggesting that the sequence specificity for Mcm helicase activation is rather relaxed and that the extent of the activation may depend on the sequence context. This would be reasonable given the flexibility and differential regulation of site selection for initiation of DNA replication during development or in various cell types, as well as the variability in initiation potential of each replication origin on the genome even within the single cell type.
15917436	We have examined in detail the effect of sequence context of the single-stranded DNA on the helicase activity of Mcm. The results indicate that thymine content of 50% is sufficient for the maximum helicase activity. The efficiency of displacement decreased as the thymine content of the 3′-tail dropped to 33% (Figure 6). The stretches of thymine residues may not be necessarily required, since repeats of TC dinucleotides served as a potent activator for Mcm4/6/7. We also noticed that the presence of a secondary structure within the single-stranded DNA is inhibitory for helicase action. Nuclease footprinting assays indicated that binding was interfered by the secondary structure (data not shown). Thus, we have concluded that Mcm4/6/7 helicase is most efficiently activated by non-structured single-stranded DNA with thymine content of 50% or more, although significant stimulation is observed also by DNA with less thymine content (Figure 7), suggesting that the sequence specificity for Mcm helicase activation is rather relaxed and that the extent of the activation may depend on the sequence context. This would be reasonable given the flexibility and differential regulation of site selection for initiation of DNA replication during development or in various <andsystem-candidate> types, as well as the variability in initiation potential of each replication origin on the genome even within the single cell type.
15917436	The specific requirement of single-stranded thymine residues for activation of Mcm helicase prompted us to examine whether they are required also for processive unwinding of duplex DNA. Our results indicated that increase of GC pair in the duplex segment significantly inhibited the Mcm helicase activity. Duplex DNA composed only of GC pairs (10 repeats of CGG) on a Y-<andsystem-candidate> was not displaced at all, while the same template was readily displaced by SV40 T-antigen (Figure 8B). Mcm helicase was inhibited by the presence of GC-rich duplex segment also on a circular single-stranded partial heteroduplex substrate. However, on this substrate, Mcm4/6/7 was able to displace DNA past the GC-rich region, albeit to a limited extent, when it was added at a high concentration. On the partial heteroduplex template, Mcm is loaded onto the circular single-stranded DNA of 6.4 kb, while it is loaded onto the 50 nt long 3′-tail DNA on the Y-fork. Thus, the difference of helicase actions may reflect the efficiency of Mcm loading. Alternatively, the presence of ‘random’ sequence at the initially unwound duplex segment in the former template may engage the Mcm helicase in a more active conformation which can displace the GC-rich duplex segment.
15917436	The specific requirement of single-stranded thymine residues for activation of Mcm helicase prompted us to examine whether they are required also for processive unwinding of duplex DNA. Our results indicated that increase of GC pair in the duplex segment significantly inhibited the Mcm helicase activity. Duplex DNA composed only of GC pairs (10 repeats of CGG) on a Y-fork was not displaced at all, while the same template was readily displaced by SV40 T-antigen (Figure 8B). Mcm helicase was inhibited by the presence of GC-rich duplex segment also on a circular single-stranded partial heteroduplex substrate. However, on this substrate, Mcm4/6/7 was able to displace DNA past the GC-rich region, albeit to a limited extent, when it was added at a high concentration. On the partial heteroduplex template, <andsystem-candidate> is loaded onto the circular single-stranded DNA of 6.4 kb, while it is loaded onto the 50 nt long 3′-tail DNA on the Y-fork. Thus, the difference of helicase actions may reflect the efficiency of Mcm loading. Alternatively, the presence of ‘random’ sequence at the initially unwound duplex segment in the former template may engage the Mcm helicase in a more active conformation which can displace the GC-rich duplex segment.
15917436	On Y-<andsystem-candidate> substrates, increase of AT base pairs in the duplex (10 repeats of CTT) restored the unwinding. These results indicate either that thymine residues are required on the duplex DNA for continuous unwinding, or that Mcm4/6/7 is simply not efficient enough to unwind the stable GC pairs. Replacement of the central guanosine with inosine in the CGG repeat duplex DNA resulted in displacement (Figure 8E) (31), suggesting that the continuous presence of AT base pair may not be essential for the Mcm helicase function and that the thermostability of GC base pairs is inhibitory for helicase action of Mcm4/6/7.
15917436	The results described in this manuscript reveal potentially important features of mammalian Mcm4/6/7 helicase, which is likely to be a key component of the eukaryotic replicative helicase. Prior to initiation of DNA replication, Mcm helicase may adopt a double hexameric complex at the partially melted origin region, and may catalyze concurrent unwinding of duplex DNA into both directions, while stably associated with the origins of DNA replication. This is similar to the T-antigen model originally proposed by Smelkova and Borowiec (21). We propose that, only when both hexamers are activated by the interacting thymine-rich sequences present within the melted region, the Mcm helicase is mobilized and initiation takes place. A crucial question is how these double hexameric helicase complexes are generated and turn into active helicases at the origins. This process would involve melting of duplex DNA, which may be facilitated by binding of preRC components in the context of proper chromatin structures, or by other unwinding factors including a topoisomerase or a newly identified Mcm8 helicase (34–36). It may also require association of <andsystem-candidate>-assisting proteins such as Cdc45 (37,38) as well as phosphorylation events by Cdk and Cdc7 kinases (39,40). One unexpected finding of this study is low helicase activity of Mcm4/6/7 on GC-rich duplex DNA. This, in conjunction with the low processivity of Mcm4/6/7 helicase, strongly indicates that the replicative helicase at the replication forks would require more than Mcm4/6/7 complex. During the processive unwinding of duplex DNA replication forks, Mcm4/6/7 may be further stimulated by interaction with other proteins, including remaining Mcm subunits, Cdc45 (37,38), GINS (41,42), DNA polymerase subunits (43), Mcm8 (35,36), etc. to become a truly processive and potent helicase capable of replicating the entire genome.
15917436	The results described in this manuscript reveal potentially important features of mammalian Mcm4/6/7 helicase, which is likely to be a key component of the eukaryotic replicative helicase. Prior to initiation of DNA replication, Mcm helicase may adopt a double hexameric complex at the partially melted origin region, and may catalyze concurrent unwinding of duplex DNA into both directions, while stably associated with the origins of DNA replication. This is similar to the T-antigen model originally proposed by Smelkova and Borowiec (21). We propose that, only when both hexamers are activated by the interacting thymine-rich sequences present within the melted region, the Mcm helicase is mobilized and initiation takes place. A crucial question is how these double hexameric helicase complexes are generated and turn into active helicases at the origins. This process would involve melting of duplex DNA, which may be facilitated by binding of preRC components in the context of proper chromatin structures, or by other unwinding factors including a topoisomerase or a newly identified Mcm8 helicase (34–36). It may also require association of fork-assisting proteins such as Cdc45 (37,38) as well as phosphorylation events by Cdk and Cdc7 kinases (39,40). One unexpected finding of this study is low helicase activity of Mcm4/6/7 on GC-rich duplex DNA. This, in conjunction with the low processivity of Mcm4/6/7 helicase, strongly indicates that the replicative helicase at the replication forks would require more than Mcm4/6/7 complex. During the processive unwinding of duplex DNA replication forks, Mcm4/6/7 may be further stimulated by interaction with other proteins, including remaining <andsystem-candidate> subunits, Cdc45 (37,38), GINS (41,42), DNA polymerase subunits (43), Mcm8 (35,36), etc. to become a truly processive and potent helicase capable of replicating the entire genome.
15917436	The results described in this manuscript reveal potentially important features of mammalian Mcm4/6/7 helicase, which is likely to be a key component of the eukaryotic replicative helicase. Prior to initiation of DNA replication, Mcm helicase may adopt a double hexameric complex at the partially melted origin region, and may catalyze concurrent unwinding of duplex DNA into both directions, while stably associated with the origins of DNA replication. This is similar to the T-antigen model originally proposed by Smelkova and Borowiec (21). We propose that, only when both hexamers are activated by the interacting thymine-rich sequences present within the melted region, the Mcm helicase is mobilized and initiation takes place. A crucial question is how these double hexameric helicase complexes are generated and turn into active helicases at the origins. This process would involve melting of duplex DNA, which may be facilitated by binding of preRC components in the context of proper chromatin structures, or by other unwinding factors including a topoisomerase or a newly identified Mcm8 helicase (34–36). It may also require association of fork-assisting proteins such as Cdc45 (37,38) as well as phosphorylation events by Cdk and Cdc7 kinases (39,40). One unexpected finding of this study is low helicase activity of Mcm4/6/7 on GC-rich duplex DNA. This, in conjunction with the low processivity of Mcm4/6/7 helicase, strongly indicates that the replicative helicase at the replication forks would require more than Mcm4/6/7 complex. During the processive unwinding of duplex DNA replication forks, Mcm4/6/7 may be further stimulated by interaction with other proteins, including remaining Mcm subunits, Cdc45 (37,38), <andsystem-candidate> (41,42), DNA polymerase subunits (43), Mcm8 (35,36), etc. to become a truly processive and potent helicase capable of replicating the entire genome.
15917436	Nuclease protection analyses of binding of Mcm4/6/7 protein to synthetic bubble and <andsystem-candidate> substrates. (A) The Bub66/T-rich substrate (4 fmol), the top strand or bottom strand of which were 32P-labeled at the 5′ end, were incubated with 0 (lane 1), 25 ng (lane 2), 50 ng (lane 3) or 75 ng (lane 4) of Mcm4/6/7 protein. Reaction mixtures were then treated with 0.11 U of DNase I or 0.3 U of nuclease P1. (B) The T-tailed Y-fork/random substrate (4 fmol) was incubated with 0 (lane 1), 15 ng (lane 2), 30 ng (lane 3), 60 ng (lane 4) or 120 ng (lane 5) of Mcm4/6/7 protein, and then treated with 0.037 U of DNase I or 0.3 U of nuclease P1. The reaction products were separated on denaturing PAGE. Single-stranded and duplex regions of the substrates used in the assays are indicated along the gel. In (A), top and bottom strands are indicated by boldface and normal lines, respectively. Regions of strong and moderate protection are indicated by bold and normal gray lines, respectively, along the substrate structure. The drawing at the bottom of (A) shows summary of the protection pattern (protected regions indicated by gray bold lines) and predicted binding modes of the double hexameric Mcm4/6/7 (shown by pale gray ovals) on the bubble substrate. The star marks represent the radioactive 5′ ends of the annealed oligonucleotides. M, radiolabeled 10 and 50 bp ladder.
15917436	DNA binding and helicase actions of Mcm4/6/7 on various <andsystem-candidate> substrates. (A) Gel-shift assays were conducted with Mcm4/6/7 on specific fork and extension substrates (3 fmol) as indicated. (B) DNA helicase assays were conducted on various substrates (3 fmol) used in (A). The amounts of Mcm4/6/7 added were 0 (lane 1), 25 (lane 2), 50 (lane 3) and 100 ng (lane 4). Lane 5, PriA helicase at 10 nM. B, boiled substrate. The drawings show schematic representation of the substrates used in the assays. Arrows a–d indicate displaced products, and their structures are indicated below the panel. The positions of the complexes containing a single hexamer or double hexamer are indicated. In the schematic drawings of the substrates, the labeled oligonucleotides are shown as bold lines, and the asterisks indicate 32P-labeled 5′-termini.
15917436	Effect of nucleotide compositions of the duplex segments on helicase action of Mcm4/6/7. DNA binding (A) and helicase (B, D and E) activities of the Mcm4/6/7 helicase were examined on various Y-<andsystem-candidate> DNAs (3 fmol) carrying different nucleotides in the duplex region as shown (A, B and E) or on single-stranded circular partial heteroduplex DNA substrates (5 fmol) (D). (A, B and E) Lane 1, no protein added; lanes 2–4 contain 25, 50 and 100 ng of the Mcm4/6/7 protein, respectively; lane 5 [in (B)], 50 ng of SV40 T-antigen. (C) Quantification of the displaced substrates in (B). (D) Helicase assays on dT40-Nmer/M13mp18 and dT40-Nmer/M13mp19 + G-rich carrying the labeled duplex regions of varied lengths. Lane 1, no protein added; lanes 2–7 contain 25, 50, 75, 125, 200 and 300 ng of the Mcm4/6/7 protein, respectively. Lanes 8 and 9, boiled M13mp18 and M13mp19 + G-rich substrates, respectively. The drawings show schematic representations of the substrates used in the assays. The red segment in bold face in (D) indicates the 66 nt long G-rich segment. The asterisks represent radiaoactive [α-32P]dGTP incorporated into the duplex segment or 32P-labeled 5′ ends of the annealed oligonucleotides. M [in (D)], denatured 50 bp ladder DNA marker; and I [in (E)], inosine. B, boiled substrate.
12079497	In this study we have used embryonic stem (ES) <andsystem-candidate>-mediated transgenesis to test the enhanced cyan fluorescent protein (ECFP) and enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP), two mutant and spectrally distinct color variants of wild type (wt) GFP. We have also tested DsRed1, the novel red fluorescent protein reporter recently cloned from the Discostoma coral by virtue of its homology to GFP. To this end, we have established lines of ES cells together with viable and fertile mice having widespread expression of either the ECFP or EYFP GFP-variant reporters. However, we were unable to generate equivalent DsRed1 lines, suggesting that DsRed1 is not developmentally neutral or that transgene expression cannot be sustained constitutively. Balanced (diploid <-> diploid) and polarized (tetraploid <-> diploid) chimeras comprising combinations of the ECFP and EYFP ES cells and/or embryos, demonstrate that populations of cells expressing each individual reporter can be distinguished within a single animal.
12079497	Dual color imaging of several GFP variant proteins is a very attractive prospect and has become a standard procedure in <andsystem-candidate> biology [7,8]. It has also recently been demonstrated in a subset of cells within the central nervous system (CNS) of mice using both transgenic and viral infection-based approaches [9,10]. We therefore wished to investigate the feasibility of non-invasive multiple reporter imaging in mice, and as a first step we wanted to ascertain whether we could establish viable and fertile mice with widespread expression of GFP variant reporters.
12079497	We tested several of the available wtGFP variants for developmental neutrality and stability of widespread expression. An ES <andsystem-candidate>-mediated transgenic approach was used to evaluate the Enhanced Cyan Fluorescent Protein (ECFP) and Enhanced Yellow Fluorescent Protein (EYFP) wtGFP spectral variants [4,11]. ECFP harbors six amino substitutions (Y66W, F64L, S65T, N146I, M153T, V163A) as compared to GFP, whereas EYFP harbors four (S65G, V68L, S72A and T203Y). In addition to increasing the quantum yield and solubility of the proteins these mutations shift the spectral profiles of the translation products [4,11].
12079497	Plasmids were constructed for driving widespread expression of each of the gene-based fluorescent protein (FP) reporters and were tested in ES <andsystem-candidate>-mediated transgenics as described previously [2]. Transgenic ES cells exhibiting robust expression of ECFP or EYFP were obtained at the same frequency as we had previously obtained for EGFP. Cells expressing one or other of the two GFP variant reporters were clearly distinguishable within a mixed population (Fig. 1a,1b,1c,1d). Interestingly however we were unable to recover clones expressing DsRed1 at the same frequency as for the GFP variant reporters after electroporation and selection under identical conditions. Indeed the DsRed1 expressing clones that we were able to recover did not retain their characteristic ES cell morphology, usually appearing smaller and more spherical (Fig. 1e and 1f), or occasionally spindle shaped (data not shown). Unlike the fluorescence produced by the GFP variants which was evenly distributed throughout the cells, the DsRed signal was never homogenous. Red fluorescence was often aggregated in what appeared to be perinuclear regions of the cytoplasm. Similar observations have been made by Furuta and colleagues when they used recombinant sindbis virus for the labeling of dendrites and axons within the CNS of adult mice [10]. In order to generate a DsRed variant that may be amenable to use in ES cells and mice, we recently introduced various sequences that direct nuclear localization to the DsRed coding region. However, again we were unable to generate ES cells or mice exhibiting robust widespread reporter activity (A.-K.H. and V.E. Papaioannou, unpublished observations).
12079497	Two ECFP+ and two EYFP+ clones exhibiting robust fluorescence were used to generate chimeras through ES <andsystem-candidate> <-> morula stage embryo aggregation [13]. All four ES cell lines transmitted through the germline, leading to the establishment of, CK4/ECFP and CK6/ECFP, two strains of mice having cyan fluorescent protein expression and, YC5/EYFP and 2A4/EYFP, two strains having widespread yellow fluorescent protein expression. In these mice the respective FP expression is constituitive, starting at preimplantation stages and continuing through postimplantation embryogenesis to adulthood (Fig. 2). One line expressing each color was chosen for further analysis and breeding to homozygosity. The availability of homozygous animals demonstrated that both reporter gene expression and the site of transgene integration were developmentally neutral.
12079497	Even though our RFP transgenic ES <andsystem-candidate> lines failed to maintain strong uniform expression with in vitro passage, we selected three lines exhibiting the most robust expression for making chimeras, in order to ascertain whether we could achieve, or possibly recover, RFP expression in animals. Cells were flow sorted prior to aggregation so as to enrich for RFP expression. Even though they had lost their characteristic ES cell morphology all three RFP+ ES cell lines went gemline as detected by coat color and PCR for the DsRed1 transgene (data not shown). However expression of the RFP reporter could not be detected in any organ of adult mice nor in embryos (data not shown). This suggests that the DsRed1 RFP reporter was unable to recapitulate the expression profile of the promoter/enhancer combination employed. Therefore it appears that GFP variant reporters are more versatile with respect to their application in mice.
12079497	Dual non-invasive reporter visualization in the organs of adult chimeras. All images depict dark field double exposures acquired by consecutively using ECFP and EYFP filters under dark field epifluorescence. Details of aggregates are schematized at the top right of each panel. (a-c) heart and pancreas from double-tagged double-compartment adult chimeras. (a) view of the surface of an adult heart. (b) close-up surface view of ventricle of a chimeric heart generated by aggregation of two diploid morulae, one hemizygous for the CK6/ECFP (ECFP+) transgene and the other hemizygous for the YC5/EYFP (EYFP+) transgene. The regions of yellow/green and cyan fluorescence are clearly mutually exclusive. The striations in the fields of fluorescence represent the proliferative zones present within the ventricle. (c) chimeric pancreas generated by aggregation of a morula hemizygous for the YC5/EYFP transgene with CK6/ECFP ES cells. The restricted fields of fluorescence represent the proliferative zones present within the pancreas. (d) liver from a double-tagged triple-compartment adult chimera. A non-fluorescent morula was aggregated with two clumps of ES cells, one carrying the CK6/ECFP transgene (ECFP+) and the other carrying the YC5/EYFP transgene (EYFP+). An ECFP+ vessel has clonally proliferated and infiltrated the liver lobe (top). Note that unlike in heart and pancreas there appears to be more interspersed blue/cyan vs green/yellow fluorescence present in the liver, possibly reflecting greater <andsystem-candidate> intermingling during the genesis of this organ.
12079497	ES <andsystem-candidate> lines exhibiting robust transgene expression in vitro were assessed in vivo for the spatiotemporal extent of transgene expression and their developmental potential in chimeras produced by aggregation with wild type tetraploid ICR embryos so as to produce completely ES cell-derived embryos, as described previously [20,23]. A detailed protocol can be found on the world wide web at . Clones giving fluorescent E12.5 embryos having no readily identifiable malformations were used to generate germline transmitting chimeras by aggregation with diploid wild type ICR embryos as described previously [21,23]. After germline transmission transgenes were bred to homozygosity. Transgenes were maintained on both mixedbred ICR and inbred 129/SvJ genetic backgrounds [24].
11597317	Following the landmark discovery by Scully et al that the homologous recombinase RAD51 colocalizes at subnuclear sites with BRCA1 [9], a number of additional results have provided evidence that both BRCA1 and BRCA2 are involved in recombinational repair of DNA damage. BRCA1 and BRCA2 form discrete nuclear foci during the S phase and after exposure to DNA damaging agents [9,10,11]. These foci are probably sites of repair of spontaneous and induced DNA damage [12,13,14]. <andsystem-candidate> lines defective in either BRCA1 or BRCA2 are sensitive to damaging agents that form double-strand breaks (DSBs), as are other cell lines defective in recombinational repair (reviewed in [15]). BRCA2 interacts with the RAD51 recombinase via direct protein-protein contacts [16,17,18,19]. Biochemical analysis also showed interaction between BRCA1 and RAD51, although these detected interactions may have been indirect [9]. The BRC repeats of BRCA2 are responsible for direct RAD51 interaction. Cells lacking BRCA1/2 fail to form damage-induced subnuclear RAD51 foci with normal efficiency, suggesting that these proteins are required for the formation of recombinase complexes at the sites of DNA damage [20,21]. Finally, genetic measurements of recombination frequency have shown that Brca1-/- embryonic stem (ES) cells are deficient in recombinational DSB repair [22,23]. The similarity between phenotypes associated with BRCA1 and BRCA2 deficiency, together with data showing a similar effect of DNA damage on distribution of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in repair-proficient cells, led to the hypothesis that BRCA2, like BRCA1, is required for efficient recombinational repair. The paper by Moynahan et al [24] provides important support for this hypothesis.
11597317	Following the landmark discovery by Scully et al that the homologous recombinase RAD51 colocalizes at subnuclear sites with BRCA1 [9], a number of additional results have provided evidence that both BRCA1 and BRCA2 are involved in recombinational repair of DNA damage. BRCA1 and BRCA2 form discrete nuclear foci during the S phase and after exposure to DNA damaging agents [9,10,11]. These foci are probably sites of repair of spontaneous and induced DNA damage [12,13,14]. Cell lines defective in either BRCA1 or BRCA2 are sensitive to damaging agents that form double-strand breaks (DSBs), as are other <andsystem-candidate> lines defective in recombinational repair (reviewed in [15]). BRCA2 interacts with the RAD51 recombinase via direct protein-protein contacts [16,17,18,19]. Biochemical analysis also showed interaction between BRCA1 and RAD51, although these detected interactions may have been indirect [9]. The BRC repeats of BRCA2 are responsible for direct RAD51 interaction. Cells lacking BRCA1/2 fail to form damage-induced subnuclear RAD51 foci with normal efficiency, suggesting that these proteins are required for the formation of recombinase complexes at the sites of DNA damage [20,21]. Finally, genetic measurements of recombination frequency have shown that Brca1-/- embryonic stem (ES) cells are deficient in recombinational DSB repair [22,23]. The similarity between phenotypes associated with BRCA1 and BRCA2 deficiency, together with data showing a similar effect of DNA damage on distribution of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in repair-proficient cells, led to the hypothesis that BRCA2, like BRCA1, is required for efficient recombinational repair. The paper by Moynahan et al [24] provides important support for this hypothesis.
11597317	Pierce et al have designed a set of recombination substrates for measuring the level of homologous recombination in vivo (Fig. 1) [25]. The DNA substrate contains a pair of mutated GFP genes (GFP encodes the easily detected green fluorescent protein), one of which contains a restriction site for I-SceI, a yeast intron encoded endonuclease with an 18 base pair recognition site. Transient transfection of an I-SceI expression vector results in the production of a DSB in the first mutated copy of GFP. One or both DNA ends formed by the break invade(s) the homologous sequence in the second mutant GFP copy, resulting in repair of the DSB via a homology-mediated gene conversion event. The configuration of the GFP construct is such that homology-mediated repair often results in the formation of a functional copy of GFP. Such events can be detected by fluorescence-activated <andsystem-candidate> sorting analysis by virtue of their expression of GFP.
11597317	Moynahan et al [24] have used such a GFP recombination substrate to demonstrate that cells with defective BRCA2 protein are deficient in their ability to repair the I-SceI-induced DSB through homologous recombination. Expression of I-SceI resulted in 1 out of 1400 cells producing GFP via homologous recombination in the human pancreatic tumor <andsystem-candidate> line CAPAN-1. CAPAN-1 cells carry a deletion of BRCA2 on one homolog and codes for a protein truncated at amino acid 1981 on the other homolog. The authors indicate that the level of I-SceI-induced recombination in CAPAN-1 is over 100-fold less than that seen using other (BRCA2+) human tumor cell lines. The different lines examined, however, are very likely to differ genetically from CAPAN-1 cells not only at the BRCA2 locus, but also at a very large number of additional loci. This raises the possibility that some or even all of the recombinational repair defect seen in CAPAN-1 could be due to mutations at non-BRCA2 loci.
11597317	While Moynahan et al were careful to point out this problem, two sets of results argue against the possibility that the recombinational repair deficiency of CAPAN-1 cells is completely independent of its defect in BRCA2. First, in the same study [24], recombination in a mouse ES <andsystem-candidate> line that expresses only truncated BRCA2 protein was measured. This line was found to have lower recombination efficiency than isogenic cells expressing full-length BRCA2 (the defect observed was about fivefold to sixfold). Second, in an independent study, Powell was able to compare derivatives of CAPAN-1 that differed only in their ability to express full-length BRCA2 protein (S. Powell, personal communication, 2001). In these experiments, the derivative expressing full-length BRCA2 yielded 10-fold more recombinants than controls expressing only truncated BRCA2 (S. Powell, personal communication, 2001). While the experimental design of these experiments was somewhat different from that of Moyna-han et al [24], the results raise the possibility that CAPAN-1 cells have more than one mutation that lowers the efficiency of recombinational repair relative to that observed in other human cell lines. Conversely, the BRCA2 defect in CAPAN-1 could be fully responsible for the 100-fold defect in recombination if the level of BRCA2 complementation observed by Powell was incomplete. Furthermore, the discrepancy between the 100-fold difference between CAPAN-1 and the other human lines as compared with the fivefold to sixfold difference between the Brca2lex1/lex2cells and Brca2+/+ ES cells might simply be accounted for by the fact that Brca2lex1/lex2 is not a null allele. Additional studies are likely to shed light on the efficiency of BRCA2-independent recombination pathways. Taken together, the results indicate that BRCA2 is indeed required for high levels of recombinational repair in both human and mouse.
11597317	Potential roles of BRCA2 in promoting assembly of Rad51 at sites of DNA damage. Chromosomal DNA is shown as pairs of straight lines, Rad51 as open circles, and BRCA2 as grey bars. (a) Prevention of nonproductive DNA interactions. BRCA2–Rad51 interaction is proposed to suppress RAD51–BRCA2 interactions until DNA damage is present. When damage occurs, Rad51 is recruited to damaged sites where is polymerizes into nucleoprotein filaments. In this model, BRCA2 is not required for assembly of functional complexes at damaged sites, only to prevent a substantial fraction of Rad51 from being sequestered in a nonfunctional form. In a BRCA2-defective <andsystem-candidate>, mutant Rad51 becomes associated with DNA at random sites and is therefore not readily recruited to sites of damage. (b) Positive regulation. BRCA2 is proposed to be required for Rad51 to assemble into functional recombinational repair complexes at sites of damage. In BRCA-defective cells, Rad51 fails to associate with sites of damage due to lack of an assembly factor.
17083276	During mammalian development, chromatin dynamics and epigenetic marking are important for genome reprogramming. Recent data suggest an important role for the chromatin assembly machinery in this process. To analyze the role of chromatin assembly factor 1 (CAF-1) during pre-implantation development, we generated a mouse line carrying a targeted mutation in the gene encoding its large subunit, p150CAF-1. Loss of p150CAF-1 in homozygous mutants leads to developmental arrest at the 16-<andsystem-candidate> stage. Absence of p150CAF-1 in these embryos results in severe alterations in the nuclear organization of constitutive heterochromatin. We provide evidence that in wild-type embryos, heterochromatin domains are extensively reorganized between the two-cell and blastocyst stages. In p150CAF-1 mutant 16-cell stage embryos, the altered organization of heterochromatin displays similarities to the structure of heterochromatin in two- to four-cell stage wild-type embryos, suggesting that CAF-1 is required for the maturation of heterochromatin during preimplantation development. In embryonic stem cells, depletion of p150CAF-1 using RNA interference results in the mislocalization, loss of clustering, and decondensation of pericentric heterochromatin domains. Furthermore, loss of CAF-1 in these cells results in the alteration of epigenetic histone methylation marks at the level of pericentric heterochromatin. These alterations of heterochromatin are not found in p150CAF-1-depleted mouse embryonic fibroblasts, which are cells that are already lineage committed, suggesting that CAF-1 is specifically required for heterochromatin organization in pluripotent embryonic cells. Our findings underline the role of the chromatin assembly machinery in controlling the spatial organization and epigenetic marking of the genome in early embryos and embryonic stem cells.
17083276	Chromatin is the support of our genetic information. It is composed of numerous repeated units called nucleosomes, in which DNA wraps around a core of histone proteins. Modifications in the composition and biochemical properties of nucleosomes play major roles in the regulation of genome function. Such modifications are termed “epigenetic” when they are inherited across <andsystem-candidate> divisions and confer new information to chromatin, in addition to the genetic information provided by DNA. It is usually believed that during genome replication, the basic chromatin assembly machinery builds up “naïve” nucleosomes, and, in a subsequent step, nucleosomes are selectively modified by a series of enzymes to acquire epigenetic information. Here, the authors studied the role of a basic chromatin assembly factor (CAF-1) in mouse embryonic stem cells and early embryos. Surprisingly, they show that CAF-1 confers epigenetic information to specific genomic regions. In addition, this study revealed that CAF-1 is required for the proper spatial organization of chromosomes in the nucleus. This new knowledge may contribute to better understanding the role of chromatin in the maintenance of embryonic stem cell identity and plasticity.
17083276	We used gene targeting in ES cells to delete exon 3 in the Chaf1a gene, which encodes p150CAF-1 (Figure 1A). Chaf1a+/− mice were born at a Mendelian frequency, were of normal size and weight, displayed no obvious abnormalities, and were fertile. Crossing heterozygous mice failed to generate viable newborn Chaf1a−/− mice. Furthermore, no homozygous Chaf1a−/− embryos were detected at any of the post-implantation stages. However, we could detect Chaf1a−/− embryos at embryonic day 4 (E4) using a PCR strategy (Figure 1B). They represent only 10% of E4 embryos obtained from Chaf1a+/− mice intercrosses, suggesting that more than half of the homozygous mutant embryos had degenerated before this stage. Moreover, mutant embryos contained only eight to 16 cells at the E4 stage, instead of 32 cells observed for wild-type or heterozygous blastocysts (Figure 1C and 1D). Further analysis by light microscopy using immunofluorescence (IF) allowed us to compare wild-type and p150CAF-1-depleted embryos. A loss of p150CAF-1 staining could not be detected before the eight-<andsystem-candidate> stage (unpublished data) suggesting that maternally contributed protein is present in the embryo up to the four-cell stage. Thus, depletion of p150CAF-1 protein from this stage allows a maximum of two additional cell divisions before developmental arrest.
17083276	Strikingly, we found that the nuclear organization of heterochromatin appeared abnormal in the nuclei of Chaf1a−/− embryos. Pericentric heterochromatin, the major component of constitutive heterochromatin, can easily be visualized in interphase nuclei by the fluorochrome DAPI and by immunostaining with HP1α [16,17–19]. In wild-type blastocysts and in mouse somatic cells, pericentric heterochromatin domains cluster together and form higher-order chromatin structures called chromocenters [20], which are visualized as DAPI-dense foci (Figure 1C). These structures were not detected in Chaf1a−/− embryos (Figure 1D). Since chromatin architecture and higher-order structures are important for genome function [21], we decided to characterize this phenotype in more detail. For this purpose, we examined the status of heterochromatin organization between the two-<andsystem-candidate> and blastocyst stages. In two-cell stage wild-type embryos, DAPI staining is diffuse and fibrillar, with regions of higher density around the nucleolar precursor bodies (Figure 1E). Heterochromatin domains are progressively assembled into DAPI-dense foci between the four-cell and 32-cell blastocyst stages (Figure 1F). Localization of HP1α confirmed that the structures visualized by DAPI staining correspond to constitutive heterochromatin (Figure 1E). Thus, the nuclear organization of heterochromatin is dramatically modified during pre-implantation development, between the two-cell and blastocyst stages. In Chaf1a−/− E4 embryos, which are arrested between the eight- and 16-cell stage, DAPI-dense foci were barely detectable (Figure 1D). Instead, DAPI staining was diffuse within the nucleus, with regions of higher density around the nucleoli and at the periphery of the nuclei (Figure 1D). Localization of HP1α showed a diffuse pattern similar to the DAPI, with some enrichment at the nuclear periphery, and around the nucleoli (Figure 1D). This abnormal organization of heterochromatin in Chaf1a−/− embryos is reminiscent of the heterochromatin organization found in two- to four-cell stage wild-type embryos (compare Figure 1D and 1F). These data evidence a key role for p150CAF-1 during pre-implantation development, and reveal that this protein is required for the proper 3-D organization of heterochromatin within embryonic cell nuclei.
17083276	Next, we wondered whether a similar requirement for CAF-1 could also be observed in ES cells, which are derived from the blastocyst inner <andsystem-candidate> mass. Given the early developmental arrest observed in Chaf1a−/− embryos, such cells could not be derived directly from null embryos, and we thus used an RNAi strategy (Figure 2A). p150CAF-1 knockdown in ES cells was quantified by Western blot analysis and IF. (Figure S1). p150CAF-1 RNAi-depleted ES cells displayed a phenotype very similar to the cells of Chaf1a−/− E4 mice. DAPI-dense foci were lost, and we observed diffuse HP1α and DAPI staining around the nucleoli and at the periphery of the nucleus (Figure 2B). This result indicates that p150CAF-1 is essential for nuclear organization of heterochromatin in ES cells in a similar way to early pre-implantation embryos. Surprisingly, we did not observe this severe alteration in heterochromatin organization in primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) following p150CAF-1 depletion by RNAi. p150CAF-1 depletion in MEFs resulted in a strong inhibition of cell proliferation (unpublished data), but did not alter the clustering of heterochromatin domains (Figures 2C and S2). Similarly, p150CAF-1 depletion in 3T3 cells did not affect heterochromatin organization [16]. These observations reveal a specific function for CAF-1 in the early embryo and ES cells.
17083276	Previous studies performed in mammalian <andsystem-candidate> lines showed that CAF-1 activity is required for S phase progression [16,23,24]. We show here that 3 d after transfection of the RNAi vector, p150CAF-1-depleted cells (identified by a complete absence of CAF-1 IF signal) appear still active for replication, as revealed by incorporation of the thymidine analog bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) (Figure 3A), the PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear antigen) pattern (Figure 3B), and flow cytometry analysis (Figure 3C). Hence, in these cells, DNA replication persists despite the drastic changes in heterochromatin organization. However, 24 h later, ES cells cease to proliferate and die, revealing that p150CAF-1 is required for an essential cellular process, as in embryos. Altogether, our data demonstrate that loss of p150CAF-1 function in ES cells and early embryos alters first the organization of heterochromatin in the nucleus and, in a subsequent step, cell cycle and viability.
17083276	Previous studies performed in mammalian cell lines showed that CAF-1 activity is required for S phase progression [16,23,24]. We show here that 3 d after transfection of the RNAi vector, p150CAF-1-depleted cells (identified by a complete absence of CAF-1 IF signal) appear still active for replication, as revealed by incorporation of the thymidine analog bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) (Figure 3A), the <andsystem-candidate> (proliferating cell nuclear antigen) pattern (Figure 3B), and flow cytometry analysis (Figure 3C). Hence, in these cells, DNA replication persists despite the drastic changes in heterochromatin organization. However, 24 h later, ES cells cease to proliferate and die, revealing that p150CAF-1 is required for an essential cellular process, as in embryos. Altogether, our data demonstrate that loss of p150CAF-1 function in ES cells and early embryos alters first the organization of heterochromatin in the nucleus and, in a subsequent step, cell cycle and viability.
17083276	Our findings showed that the nuclear localization of HP1α is severely altered in Chaf1a−/− embryos and p150CAF-1-depleted ES cells. We therefore examined the status of other epigenetic marks previously shown to characterize pericentric heterochromatin. We first tested DNA CpG methylation [25] at major satellite repeats and found no significant difference between control and p150CAF-1-depleted cells (Figure 6). As the LTM7 ES <andsystem-candidate> line that we used in our RNAi experiments is a female (XX) cell line, DNA methylation is globally reduced in these cells [26]. To rule out the possibility that hypomethylation of pericentric repeats might contribute to the destabilization of heterochromatin domains in p150CAF-1-depleted ES cells, we tested our RNAi plasmid vector in a XY ES cell line, and confirmed that loss of p150CAF-1 leads to disruption of heterochromatin organization independently of the degree of DNA methylation at pericentric repeats (unpublished data). We next analyzed specific histone modifications [27] in chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments using native chromatin [28]. We found that pericentric DNA was immunoprecipitated with a 2-fold lower efficiency with H4K20me3 [29,30] antibodies following p150CAF-1 depletion (Figure 7A and 7B). Immunoprecipitation of minor satellite repeats in the same experiment was less affected (Figure 7B), showing that loss of p150CAF-1 function mainly affects H4K20me3 at pericentric heterochromatin. Moreover, no significant difference in immunoprecipitation efficiency was detected at intracisternal A particle (IAP) elements (Figure 7B), which are noncentromeric repeated DNA elements also enriched in H4K20me3 [31]. This result shows that p150CAF-1 contributes to normal levels of H4K20me3 at pericentric heterochromatin, but not necessarily at other loci. The H3K9me3 mark [32] was also significantly reduced in p150CAF-1-depleted cells, though to a lesser extent than H4K20me3 (Figure 7A and 7B).
17083276	Here, we provide evidence that p150CAF-1 has a crucial function during mouse early embryogenesis and in ES cells. Previous studies showed that CAF-1 is essential for the progression of DNA replication in vertebrates. In Xenopus laevis, p150CAF-1 function is required for the rapid <andsystem-candidate> divisions that occur during early development [33]. Similarly, CAF-1 is essential in mammalian cell lines for the progression of DNA replication [16,23,24,34]. Our findings reveal a role for CAF-1 in the nuclear organization of heterochromatin domains during early development and in ES cells. We show that in p150CAF-1-depleted ES cells, while DNA replication initially persists without significant perturbation in nucleosomal organization, severe heterochromatin organization defects can be observed. Loss of p150CAF-1 did not affect PML bodies in ES cell nuclei, showing that nuclear architecture is not generally altered. Ultimately, p150CAF-1 depletion results in the arrest of ES cell division and cell death. Given the major defects observed in heterochromatin organization, it is tempting to speculate that these defects cause the developmental arrest in the embryos and death in ES cells. The role of CAF-1 in the nuclear organization of heterochromatin includes spatial localization, condensation, and clustering of pericentric domains. This important function of CAF-1 was not revealed in primary MEFs, 3T3 cells, or human cell lines, suggesting that it is specific of pluripotent embryonic cells. Alternatively, early embryos and ES cells, whose genome is more plastic than somatic cells, might represent a particularly sensitive context in which the importance of CAF-1 in heterochromatin organization is exacerbated. In ES cells, major architectural chromatin proteins are hyperdynamic and bind relatively loosely to chromatin [35]. In this cellular context, our findings show that proper heterochromatin nuclear architecture relies on CAF-1 function. In contrast, in undifferentiated cells that are already lineage committed (such as MEFs) genome architecture might be more stable than in ES cells and thus cannot be disrupted by CAF-1 depletion. This important function of CAF-1 in pluripotent embryonic cells could be partially conserved during evolution. Indeed, in Arabidopsis thaliana, in which CAF-1 is not essential for viability [36], loss of CAF-1 is associated with a mild alteration in chromocenter size [37]. This phenotype is somehow reminiscent of loss of CAF-1-mediated defects in heterochromatin organization in early mouse embryos. In mouse ES cells, we show that CAF-1 is also required for regular levels of H4K20me3 at pericentric repeats, but not at IAP elements, which are repeated sequences spread all over the mouse genome. These data suggest that proper nuclear organization and epigenetic marking of pericentric heterochromatin are coupled in ES cells. Alternatively, 3-D organization of heterochromatin and epigenetic marking might represent two independent functions of CAF-1.
17083276	In agreement with a recent report [40], our analysis of heterochromatin in pre-implantation embryos has revealed drastic changes in nuclear organization between the two-<andsystem-candidate> and blastocyst stages. Cloning experiments in mouse revealed that the nuclear organization of heterochromatin in ES cell nuclei was quickly reverted into the one-cell stage-specific form after nuclear transfer [40]. Hence, remodeling of heterochromatin 3-D organization parallels nuclear reprogramming toward an early embryonic status in cloned embryos. This drastic reorganization of heterochromatin organization is similar to that observed in p150CAF-1-depleted ES cells, and in developmentally arrested 16-cell stage Chaf1a−/− embryos. These data show that CAF-1 is involved in setting up proper heterochromatin architecture during the first cell divisions of embryonic life. Given the importance of nuclear organization in the control of gene expression [21,41], this finding suggests that CAF-1 contributes to the coordinated programs of gene expression during early embryogenesis. Our findings open new perspectives in the understanding of chromatin dynamics during early development and in pluripotent embryonic cells. While most studies focused on the role of DNA methylation and histone modifying enzymes [3], our data point to the importance of the chromatin assembly machinery. We show that in addition to assembling nucleosomes, CAF-1 provides spatial and epigenetic information to heterochromatin domains in early embryos and ES cells.
17083276	AT-1 ES cells [42] (a gift of M. Vernet) were used for gene targeting. LTM7 ES cells were used in all RNAi experiments. We derived this <andsystem-candidate> line from (C57BL/6 × 129) F1 females bred with C3H/HeJ males. LTM7 are XX ES cells, competent for germ line transmission. Primary MEFs were derived from E13 embryos as described in [43].
17083276	Cells were fixed for 20 min in PBS with 4% paraformaldehyde, and immunodetection was performed as previously described [44]. E4 embryos were collected and treated with tyrode acid to remove the zona pellucida, deposited onto microscope slides, and processed for immunostaining as described for ES cells. Antibodies anti-HP1α (2HP1H5, Euromedex, France), anti-H4K20me3 (Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom), anti-BrdU (DakoCytomation, Glostrup, Denmark), anti-<andsystem-candidate> (DakoCytomation), and anti-PML (Upstate Biotechnology, Lake Placid, New York, United States) were all used at 1/1000 dilution. Antibodies anti-mouse p150CAF1 [16] and anti-H3K9me3 (Upstate Biotechnology) were used at 1/250 and 1/500, respectively. All secondary antibodies were purchased from Molecular Probes (Sunnyvale, California, United States).
17083276	The apparent difference in the efficiency of CAF-1 knockdown revealed by Western blot and IF likely reflects the observation that the RNAi plasmid vector used in this study is efficient in 85% of the transfected ES <andsystem-candidate> population, whereas 15% of cells display no inhibition of the target gene (see Materials and Methods).
17083276	We thank E. Heard and S. Khochbin for critical reading and suggestions; S. Jounier and H. Humbertclaude for <andsystem-candidate> culture; J. Mitja, S. Thessier, and J. C. Robillard for animal care; M. Vernet for AT-1 cells; K. Nacerddine for the PML antibody; N. Gilbert and T. Bestor for probes; G. Hamard for advice on blastocyst injection; P. Le Baccon for help on image analysis; and C. Mann, A. Sentenac, and E. Moustacchi for their support.
17083276	(C) Immunodetection of p150CAF-1 (green) and HP1α (red) in E4 embryos derived from Chaf1a+/− intercrosses. Because Chaf1a+/+ and Chaf1a+/− embryos both stain positively for the presence of p150CAF-1, they are both designated as wild-type. p150CAF-1 expression, which indicates ongoing S phase, can be detected in most cells within the wild-type blastocyst (upper panel). The lower panel shows a 12-<andsystem-candidate> embryo labeling negatively for p150CAF-1. Only nonspecific background labeling can be observed. In each panel, the right-hand image shows the merge between the HP1α fluorescence and DAPI-stained DNA in blue. Pink color indicates the association of HP1 with DAPI-dense material. The bottom of each panel shows the magnification of a nucleus selected from the above embryo (white square). The arrowhead indicates the typical heterochromatin foci revealed by DAPI and HP1α staining in wild-type embryos. These foci are not visible in Chaf1a−/− embryos. DAPI and HP1α staining are diffuse within the nucleus of p150CAF-1-depleted embryos, with enrichment at the nuclear periphery, revealing abnormal heterochromatin organization. Scale bars represent 10 μm.
17083276	(B) Immunodetection of <andsystem-candidate> (red) revealed no significant difference in the formation of replication foci between control and p150CAF-1-depleted ES cells. Immunodetection of p150CAF-1 is shown in green and the merging of p150CAF-1 and PCNA appears in yellow.
17083276	(C) Flow cytometry analysis showed a similar <andsystem-candidate>-cycle profile for control and p150CAF-1-depleted ES cells. Results are presented as the percentage of cells in each phase of the cell cycle (G1, S, G2/M), as defined by BrdU incorporation and DNA content. Data presented are the mean of three independent experiments; error bars indicate the standard deviation. All experiments were performed 3 d after transfection of the siRNA vectors.
16121255	Congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) is a disease characterized by failure of the kidney to concentrate urine in response to vasopressin. Human kindreds with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus have been found to harbor mutations in the vasopressin receptor 2 (Avpr2) gene or the vasopressin-sensitive water channel aquaporin-2 (Aqp2) gene. Development of a treatment is rendered difficult due to the lack of a viable animal model. Through forward genetic screening of ethylnitrosourea-mutagenized mice, we report the identification and characterization of a mouse model of NDI, with an F204V mutation in the Aqp2 gene. Unlike previously attempted murine models of NDI, our mice survive to adulthood and more exactly recapitulate the human disorder. Previous in vitro experiments using renal <andsystem-candidate> lines suggest recessive Aqp2 mutations result in improper trafficking of the mutant water pore. Using these animals, we have directly proven this hypothesis of improper AQP2 translocation as the molecular defect in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in the intact organism. Additionally, using a renal cell line we show that the mutated protein, AQP2-F204V, is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum and that this abnormal localization can be rescued by wild-type protein. This novel mouse model allows for further mechanistic studies as well as testing of pharmacological and gene therapies for NDI.
16121255	Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) is a disease marked by excessive urination and thirst. Normally, the hypothalamus senses situations where water is limited and signals to the kidney to increase water reabsorption from urine. The signaling molecule secreted by the hypothalamus is arginine vasopressin (AVP), which binds to a specific protein on the surface of kidney cells, AVP receptor (AVPR2). AVP binding to its receptor on kidney cells begins a series of biochemical events that ultimately results in the insertion of a protein, aquaporin 2 (AQP2), into the outer surface of the kidney <andsystem-candidate>. As its name suggests, AQP2 facilitates the reuptake of water from the urinary space into the cell, thus concentrating the urine and conserving water. Congenital NDI is caused by mutations in either the water channel, AQP2, or in the receptor, AVPR2. While these mutations have been studied extensively in the lab, work in live animals has been very limited. This report describes the first viable mouse model of NDI. Previous models have been attempted by targeted mutation, i.e., genes known to be involved in the disease have been altered in the mouse, a so-called reverse genetic approach. Reverse genetic approaches have so far failed to produce a viable mouse model of NDI. Here the authors take a forward genetic approach in which genes are mutated at random and animals are screened for disease-like properties. As well as proving hypotheses that come from lab studies, this model opens the door to the testing of gene therapy or other therapies for treatment of NDI.
16121255	Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) is a disease characterized by excessive urination and thirst, despite normal production of the antidiuretic hormone arginine vasopressin (AVP) [1]. The inherited forms are either <andsystem-candidate>-linked as a consequence of mutation of the Avpr2 gene [2], or autosomal due to mutation of the Aqp2 gene [3]. Aquaporin-2 (AQP2) is a pore-forming protein belonging to a family of water channels [4], and it is expressed in collecting-duct principal cells in the kidney [5]. Generally these proteins permit the passage of water through the plasma membrane (PM) of cells, several of which carry out this role specifically in the process of water reabsorption from urine in the kidney. It has been established that aquaporins, although functional as a monomer, tetramerize before their insertion into the plasma membrane [4,6]. Furthermore these proteins can also be differentially targeted to distinct regions of the PM; for example, AQP2 is routed to the apical membrane of cells surrounding the collecting duct, whereas other aquaporins (AQP3 or 4) are inserted into the basolateral face. Unlike all other family members, AQP2 is not constitutively inserted into the plasma membrane. Under basal conditions, the protein resides in subapical intracellular vesicles; however, under conditions requiring water retention AQP2 translocates to the apical membrane, permitting water reabsorption [7,8]. For this process to occur, AVP binds its receptor, AVPR2, on the basolateral face of the collecting duct cells, leading to a rise in intracellular cAMP, ultimately resulting in phosphorylation of AQP2 at serine 256 by cAMP-dependent protein kinase [9] and its redistribution to the plasma membrane.
16121255	Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) is a disease characterized by excessive urination and thirst, despite normal production of the antidiuretic hormone arginine vasopressin (AVP) [1]. The inherited forms are either X-linked as a consequence of mutation of the Avpr2 gene [2], or autosomal due to mutation of the Aqp2 gene [3]. Aquaporin-2 (AQP2) is a pore-forming protein belonging to a family of water channels [4], and it is expressed in collecting-duct principal cells in the kidney [5]. Generally these proteins permit the passage of water through the plasma membrane (<andsystem-candidate>) of cells, several of which carry out this role specifically in the process of water reabsorption from urine in the kidney. It has been established that aquaporins, although functional as a monomer, tetramerize before their insertion into the plasma membrane [4,6]. Furthermore these proteins can also be differentially targeted to distinct regions of the PM; for example, AQP2 is routed to the apical membrane of cells surrounding the collecting duct, whereas other aquaporins (AQP3 or 4) are inserted into the basolateral face. Unlike all other family members, AQP2 is not constitutively inserted into the plasma membrane. Under basal conditions, the protein resides in subapical intracellular vesicles; however, under conditions requiring water retention AQP2 translocates to the apical membrane, permitting water reabsorption [7,8]. For this process to occur, AVP binds its receptor, AVPR2, on the basolateral face of the collecting duct cells, leading to a rise in intracellular cAMP, ultimately resulting in phosphorylation of AQP2 at serine 256 by cAMP-dependent protein kinase [9] and its redistribution to the plasma membrane.
16121255	In a forward genetic screen, a mouse with an Aqp2 mutation was identified. The purpose of this study was to characterize this murine model of recessive nephrogenic DI. We now report a novel F204V mutation in the Aqp2 gene. This allele of Aqp2 was found to cause the first mouse model of NDI to survive past the first week of life. Molecular analyses concluded that mutant AQP2 adopts a different subcellular localization in renal collecting-duct cells, and was resistant to translocation induced by desmopressin, an agonist of AVP. In vitro studies using the Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) <andsystem-candidate> line demonstrated an endoplasmic reticulum pattern for the mutant protein, and apparent resistance to translocation. These data conclusively prove that autosomal recessive NDI is a consequence of improper AQP2 routing in the intact mammal.
16121255	In humans, recessive alleles of Aqp2 are postulated to cause NDI because they do not properly translocate to the apical <andsystem-candidate> surface in response to AVP. This postulate comes solely from in vitro studies in which mutant Aqp2 cDNAs corresponding to human disease mutations are transfected into kidney cell lines. In general, such recessive alleles, when visualized immunocytochemically, fail to localize to AVP-responsive vesicles. Rather, they get trapped in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Our mouse model of NDI affords the first opportunity to test this hypothesis in a mature animal. As shown in Figure 4A (top row of photomicrographs), AQP2 (stained red) normally localized to the subapical region of collecting duct cells in kidneys of wild-type mice. Upon stimulation with dDAVP, AQP2 translocated to or near the cell surface (Figure 4A, second row). In kidneys taken from mutant animals, however, AQP2 was distributed randomly throughout the cell in the basal state (Figure 4A, third row), while AQP3 (green) appropriately localized to the basolateral surface [23]. Furthermore, upon dDAVP stimulation, AQP2-F204V failed to translocate to the cell surface (Figure 4A, bottom row). To confirm these findings, the staining was repeated in kidneys taken from two further mice for each class, wild-type or mutant, with or without dDAVP treatment, with identical results.
16121255	In humans, recessive alleles of Aqp2 are postulated to cause NDI because they do not properly translocate to the apical cell surface in response to AVP. This postulate comes solely from in vitro studies in which mutant Aqp2 cDNAs corresponding to human disease mutations are transfected into kidney cell lines. In general, such recessive alleles, when visualized immunocytochemically, fail to localize to AVP-responsive vesicles. Rather, they get trapped in the endoplasmic reticulum (<andsystem-candidate>). Our mouse model of NDI affords the first opportunity to test this hypothesis in a mature animal. As shown in Figure 4A (top row of photomicrographs), AQP2 (stained red) normally localized to the subapical region of collecting duct cells in kidneys of wild-type mice. Upon stimulation with dDAVP, AQP2 translocated to or near the cell surface (Figure 4A, second row). In kidneys taken from mutant animals, however, AQP2 was distributed randomly throughout the cell in the basal state (Figure 4A, third row), while AQP3 (green) appropriately localized to the basolateral surface [23]. Furthermore, upon dDAVP stimulation, AQP2-F204V failed to translocate to the cell surface (Figure 4A, bottom row). To confirm these findings, the staining was repeated in kidneys taken from two further mice for each class, wild-type or mutant, with or without dDAVP treatment, with identical results.
16121255	To investigate the mechanism of defective translocation of AQP2-F204V, we turned to transfection of MDCK cells. Stable <andsystem-candidate> lines expressing mouse wild-type AQP2 and AQP2-F204V were established. Immunoblots of protein extracts from stable cell lines showed that MDCK cells recapitulate the glycosylation defect seen in mutant mice (unpublished data). The wild-type protein was again present in three different forms. Cells expressing AQP2-F204V lacked the 35–45 kDa form and were enriched in the core-glycosylated 31 kDa form.
16121255	In transfected, unstimulated MDCK cells, wild-type AQP2 (stained green) appeared in a punctate pattern distributed throughout the subapical region (Figure 4B, left column photomicrographs), consistent with vesicular compartmentalization. AQP2-F204V, on the other hand, appeared in a punctate but perinuclear pattern (Figure 4B, third column). Upon stimulation with forskolin, a cAMP-dependent protein kinase activator, wild-type AQP2 translocated to the apical surface of polarized MDCK cells (Figure 4B, second column). Along the z-axis, the perinuclear distribution of AQP2-F204V was clearly seen, and this distribution is not altered by forskolin (Figure 4B, bottom row, two right columns). The perinuclear distribution of AQP2-F204V is consistent with an <andsystem-candidate> compartmentalization. To test the idea that AQP2-F204V localizes to the ER, we co-stained cells transfected with Aqp2F204V (cDNA) for AQP2 and an ER marker, calnexin (Figure 4C). Colocalization of calnexin with AQP2 was investigated directly, and it was found that 80% of all AQP2-F204V protein colocalized with calnexin. The remaining 20% appeared at the periphery of the ER, representing AQP2-F204V that had potentially progressed beyond the ER. This “ER escape” was consistent with the small proportion of mature, complex glycosylated, AQP2-F204V in mutant kidneys (see Figure 3A).
16121255	Animals heterozygous for the Aqp2F204V mutation were not affected in their urine production or urine osmolality (see Figure 1C and 1D). It has also been shown that a recessive NDI allele, AQP2-R187C, does not interact with wild-type protein in oocytes [24], nor does it homo-oligomerize in MDCK cells [22]. Therefore, kidneys from heterozygous animals were examined for evidence of two populations of AQP2 protein. Surprisingly, immunohistochemical staining of kidney collecting ducts from Aqp2F204V/+ mice revealed a pattern remarkably similar to wild type (Figure 5A). AQP2 translocated completely to the apical <andsystem-candidate> surface upon dDAVP stimulation. This wild-type staining pattern may simply reflect the fact that decreasing the amount of mutant protein by half makes it undetectable by immunocytochemistry. Alternatively, the presence of wild-type protein may alter the localization of the mutant protein. Indeed, Hendriks et al. proposed a “piggy-back” mechanism to explain the transport of nonglycosylated subunits of AQP2 to the cell surface by glycosylated subunits [22]. It has also been shown that wild-type AQP2 protein can rescue a translocation-defective mutant protein, AQP2-P262L, when the two are coexpressed in MDCK cells [25].
16121255	If wild-type and mutant proteins are indeed interacting in the <andsystem-candidate>, is this interaction sufficient to rescue the localization of mutant protein? To answer this question, we used MDCK cells stably transfected with wild-type AQP2 expressing vector or with empty vector. On top of these, we transiently transfected AQP2-GFP or AQP2-F204V-GFP expression constructs. AQP2-GFP localized to the apical surface upon forskolin stimulation whether it was transiently transfected into vector-only cells (Figure 5C, upper left images) or into wild-type AQP2 cells (Figure 5C, upper right). AQP2-F204V-GFP, when expressed by transient transfection into vector only cells, showed a diffuse cytoplasmic distribution pattern (Figure 5C, lower left). When expressed in wild-type AQP2 cells, however, AQP2-F204V-GFP localized to the apical surface to varying degrees (Figure 5C, lower right images [i–iii]). The lower right images of Figure 5C shows three cells from a single transfection. The first is a nontransfected cell that shows the localization of the stably expressing wild-type AQP2, which is apical upon forskolin stimulation. The next two show expression of both the stable wild-type AQP2 and the transient AQP2-F204V-GFP. In cell (ii), localization of wild-type AQP2 was indistinguishable from AQP2-F204V-GFP; both were apical upon forskolin stimulation. Although the effect was subtle in cell (iii), AQP2-F204V-GFP was partly localized to the apical surface. Generally, the localization of AQP2-F204V-GFP was clearly more apical when wild-type AQP2 was also expressed.
16121255	To confirm these results biochemically, we transfected the same <andsystem-candidate> lines (wild-type AQP2 or vector) with F204V-GFP, biotinylated surface proteins after forskolin stimulation, and precipitated the biotinylated proteins (Figure 5D). AQP2-F204V-GFP is expressed approximately equally in both cell lines (Figure 5D, total cells), but is biotinylated only when wild-type AQP2 is also expressed (Figure 5D, surface biotinylated). Since only cell surface proteins are accessible to biotin, these results indicate that AQP2-F204V is transported to the cell surface when wild-type AQP2 is present, but not on its own.
16121255	To confirm these results biochemically, we transfected the same cell lines (wild-type AQP2 or vector) with F204V-GFP, biotinylated surface proteins after forskolin stimulation, and precipitated the biotinylated proteins (Figure 5D). AQP2-F204V-GFP is expressed approximately equally in both cell lines (Figure 5D, total cells), but is biotinylated only when wild-type AQP2 is also expressed (Figure 5D, surface biotinylated). Since only <andsystem-candidate> surface proteins are accessible to biotin, these results indicate that AQP2-F204V is transported to the cell surface when wild-type AQP2 is present, but not on its own.
16121255	Aqp2F204/F204V mice are viable and grow and reproduce normally. They are, however, severely defective in their ability to concentrate urine, leading to increased urine output and water intake, thus making them the first mouse model of NDI to survive to maturity. In humans, NDI is caused by mutations in Avpr2 or Aqp2. Knockout of the <andsystem-candidate>-linked Avpr2 gene in mice [15] gave an NDI-like phenotype in male, hemizygous neonates, but the phenotype could not be assessed in adults as the mice died within 1 wk of birth. The adult heterozygous females showed a mild tendency toward increased urinary output and water intake and decreased urine osmolality. Knockout of the mouse Aqp2 gene has not been reported. A knock-in of a human disease-causing mutation (T126M), however, has been made [18]. These mice have a severe urine-concentrating defect resulting in dehydration and death within 1 wk of birth. Curiously, AQP2-T126M does localize properly in at least a subset of cells. The grossly abnormal collecting duct morphology makes it impossible to pinpoint the molecular defect in these knock-in mice.
16121255	The T126M knock-in clearly shows that Aqp2 is an essential gene [18]. The fact that our mice survive shows either that AQP2-F204V possesses some residual water transporting ability or that there are AVP-independent pathways for water reabsorption. Residual activity of AQP2-F204V is likely, as mutant animals show some small response to dDAVP, although dDAVP-stimulated urine osmolality remains quite low. Immunostaining of kidney shows that AQP2-F204V does not efficiently transport water, because it fails to localize to the apical <andsystem-candidate> surface after dDAVP treatment. Some residual activity of AQP2 would imply that some small, undetectable portion of the mutant protein is getting to the cell surface. The surface biotinylation experiment (Figure 5D) suggests that no mutant protein gets to the surface, but this does not necessarily reflect the situation in vivo. While this small fraction of protein may not be detectable by immunofluorescence, Western blotting shows that some mutant protein does progress beyond the ER (35–45 kDa species in Figure 3A). Compared to wild-type, mutant protein is enriched in the high-mannose, core-glycosylated form (31 kDa) and deficient in nonglycosylated (29 kDa) and complex glycosylated (35–45 kDa) forms. The presence of a reduced but detectable amount of protein in the 35–45 kDa range indicates that mutant protein is transported out of the ER, but with greatly reduced efficiency. Colocalization of AQP2-F204V with the ER protein calnexin in transfected MDCK cells shows that, while most of the mutant protein is trapped in the ER, some does progress beyond the ER. Diminished response to dDAVP, diminished abundance of mature glycosylated protein in mutant animals, and the transport of a fraction of mutant protein beyond the ER in MDCK cells are all consistent with the notion that AQP2-F204V misfolding is limited and that it may retain some residual water transporting activity. Evidently this residual activity is sufficient for the viability and growth of mutant animals.
16121255	The T126M knock-in clearly shows that Aqp2 is an essential gene [18]. The fact that our mice survive shows either that AQP2-F204V possesses some residual water transporting ability or that there are AVP-independent pathways for water reabsorption. Residual activity of AQP2-F204V is likely, as mutant animals show some small response to dDAVP, although dDAVP-stimulated urine osmolality remains quite low. Immunostaining of kidney shows that AQP2-F204V does not efficiently transport water, because it fails to localize to the apical cell surface after dDAVP treatment. Some residual activity of AQP2 would imply that some small, undetectable portion of the mutant protein is getting to the cell surface. The surface biotinylation experiment (Figure 5D) suggests that no mutant protein gets to the surface, but this does not necessarily reflect the situation in vivo. While this small fraction of protein may not be detectable by immunofluorescence, Western blotting shows that some mutant protein does progress beyond the <andsystem-candidate> (35–45 kDa species in Figure 3A). Compared to wild-type, mutant protein is enriched in the high-mannose, core-glycosylated form (31 kDa) and deficient in nonglycosylated (29 kDa) and complex glycosylated (35–45 kDa) forms. The presence of a reduced but detectable amount of protein in the 35–45 kDa range indicates that mutant protein is transported out of the ER, but with greatly reduced efficiency. Colocalization of AQP2-F204V with the ER protein calnexin in transfected MDCK cells shows that, while most of the mutant protein is trapped in the ER, some does progress beyond the ER. Diminished response to dDAVP, diminished abundance of mature glycosylated protein in mutant animals, and the transport of a fraction of mutant protein beyond the ER in MDCK cells are all consistent with the notion that AQP2-F204V misfolding is limited and that it may retain some residual water transporting activity. Evidently this residual activity is sufficient for the viability and growth of mutant animals.
16121255	Reduced efficiency in exiting the <andsystem-candidate> may explain why AQP2-F204V is enriched in the 31 kDa high-mannose glycosylated form. The high-mannose core oligosaccharide is added in the ER and is later modified and elaborated in the Golgi apparatus [26]. The increase in the high-mannose glycosylated form of AQP2-F204V may simply reflect its prolonged presence in the ER and exposure to oligosaccharyl transferase.
16121255	While improper localization of AQP2 explains the phenotype of homozygous mutant mice, the complete lack of a phenotype in heterozygous mice is more difficult to explain. Physiologically, heterozygous mice have no symptoms (see Figure 1C), and they are indistinguishable from wild type on immunostaining of kidneys (Figure 5A). The presence of 50% of the normal amount of wild-type protein may explain the lack of symptoms, but it cannot explain the lack of any <andsystem-candidate>-retained mutant protein. Rather, the phenotype of the Aqp2F204V/+ animals suggests that the mutant protein is being rescued by the wild-type protein. Indeed, de Mattia et al. (26) have demonstrated that one recessive allele of Aqp2, P262L, does not properly translocate when expressed by itself in MDCK cells, but that in the presence of wild-type protein, it localizes normally. The same mechanism seems to apply in vivo with Aqp2F204V/+ mice. In support of this, AQP2-F204V can interact with wild-type AQP2 (Figure 5B), and when coexpressed with wild-type protein, AQP2-F204V can reach the cell surface (Figure 5C bottom right panel and 5D). Although it has been demonstrated that a recessive allele (encoding AQP2-R187C) of NDI fails to interact with wild-type AQP2 [6], here we show that AQP2-F204V does interact with the wild-type protein, presumably as part of heterotetramers, and represents a rescuable allele, both in vitro and in vivo.
16121255	While improper localization of AQP2 explains the phenotype of homozygous mutant mice, the complete lack of a phenotype in heterozygous mice is more difficult to explain. Physiologically, heterozygous mice have no symptoms (see Figure 1C), and they are indistinguishable from wild type on immunostaining of kidneys (Figure 5A). The presence of 50% of the normal amount of wild-type protein may explain the lack of symptoms, but it cannot explain the lack of any ER-retained mutant protein. Rather, the phenotype of the Aqp2F204V/+ animals suggests that the mutant protein is being rescued by the wild-type protein. Indeed, de Mattia et al. (26) have demonstrated that one recessive allele of Aqp2, P262L, does not properly translocate when expressed by itself in MDCK cells, but that in the presence of wild-type protein, it localizes normally. The same mechanism seems to apply in vivo with Aqp2F204V/+ mice. In support of this, AQP2-F204V can interact with wild-type AQP2 (Figure 5B), and when coexpressed with wild-type protein, AQP2-F204V can reach the <andsystem-candidate> surface (Figure 5C bottom right panel and 5D). Although it has been demonstrated that a recessive allele (encoding AQP2-R187C) of NDI fails to interact with wild-type AQP2 [6], here we show that AQP2-F204V does interact with the wild-type protein, presumably as part of heterotetramers, and represents a rescuable allele, both in vitro and in vivo.
16121255	Immunostaining the kidneys of homozygous Aqp2F204V/F204V mice shows that the mutant-expressing collecting duct cells can not mediate water reabsorption, because it fails to insert into the apical plasma membrane in response to dDAVP. This is this first in vivo proof of a long-standing hypothesis that comes from in vitro studies with recessive Aqp2 mutations. Transfection into MDCK cells of any of several Aqp2 mutations corresponding to recessive human alleles shows abnormal subcellular localization [25], [27] and failure to appropriately translocate to the plasma membrane. Thus, misfolding, retention in the <andsystem-candidate>, and failure to translocate in response to dDAVP were proposed as the mechanism for autosomal recessive NDI. Here we not only prove this hypothesis but also establish a useful model for human NDI. This mouse model of NDI based on an Aqp2 allele that can be rescued provides the opportunity to test therapies, including gene therapy, that may promote proper subcellular localization.
16121255	MDCK cells (CCL-34; ATCC, Manassas, Virginia, United States) were cultured in DMEM (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, United States) supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma-Aldrich), 100 U/ml of penicillin, and 100 μg/ml of streptomycin at 37 °C in 5% CO2. To generate stable MDCK <andsystem-candidate> lines, cells were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) and the pcDNA3.1 expression constructs (containing wild-type AQP2, AQP2-F204V, or no insert) and selected with 900 μg/ml G418 (Sigma-Aldrich). Individual colonies were expanded 14 d later. For the duration of these experiments, the antibiotic was continually added to the media. Transient GFP transfections were carried out in subconfluent stable cells lines also using Lipofectamine 2000.
16121255	<andsystem-candidate> surface biotinylation was performed in a similar manner. However, pEGFP-AQP2-F204V, was transfected into MDCK cells stably expressing wild-type AQP2 and cells made stable with vector alone. Twenty-four hours post-transfection, cells were stimulated with forskolin, trypsinized, resuspended in 1 ml of PBS (2.5 × 106 cells/ml), and incubated with 0.5 mg of NHS-PEO4-biotin (Pierce Biotechnology) for 30 min at room temperature. Cells were washed once in 10 mM Tris (pH 8) and three times in PBS, after which membranes were purified and solubilized as described above. Solubilized membranes were incubated with 20 μl of immobilized streptavidin (Pierce Biotechnology) for 2 h at 4 °C. Finally the precipitated proteins were washed in RIPA buffer and boiled in 50 μl of Laemmli buffer. Total cells and the biotinylated precipitates were immunoblotting using an antibody to AQP2.
16121255	MDCK stable <andsystem-candidate> lines expressing vector alone, wild-type AQP2, or AQP2-F204V (and in some cases transiently expressing a GFP construct) were grown on fibronectin-coated coverslips until tight junctions formed. Cells were treated with or without 150 μM forskolin for 90 min, and fixed in methanol at −20 °C. Subsequently, cells were washed and permeabilized in 0.2% Triton X-100 for 5 min, and sequentially probed for AQP2 and organelle markers for either the PM or the ER. AQP2 was detected using goat anti-AQP2 (1:100; Santa Cruz Biotechnology; #sc-9882) and a 1:200 dilution of AlexaFluor 488-conjugated donkey anti-goat secondary antibody. The PM and ER were probed using mouse anti-Na+/K+-ATPase (Upstate, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States) or rabbit anti-calnexin (Stressgen Biotechnology, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada) antibodies and the secondary antibodies, Cy3-conjugated goat anti-mouse (1:200; Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, Pennsylvania, United States) or AlexaFluor 594-conjugated chicken anti-rabbit (1:200) respectively. Cells were washed in PBS, counterstained with DAPI, and mounted in Vectashield. In experiments in which GFP fusions were used, AQP2 was probed using the antibody combination used for kidney immunohistochemistry in order to detect the AQP2 at 594 nm, to distinguish between the GFP fusion proteins.
16121255	MDCK stable cell lines expressing vector alone, wild-type AQP2, or AQP2-F204V (and in some cases transiently expressing a GFP construct) were grown on fibronectin-coated coverslips until tight junctions formed. Cells were treated with or without 150 μM forskolin for 90 min, and fixed in methanol at −20 °C. Subsequently, cells were washed and permeabilized in 0.2% Triton X-100 for 5 min, and sequentially probed for AQP2 and organelle markers for either the <andsystem-candidate> or the ER. AQP2 was detected using goat anti-AQP2 (1:100; Santa Cruz Biotechnology; #sc-9882) and a 1:200 dilution of AlexaFluor 488-conjugated donkey anti-goat secondary antibody. The PM and ER were probed using mouse anti-Na+/K+-ATPase (Upstate, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States) or rabbit anti-calnexin (Stressgen Biotechnology, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada) antibodies and the secondary antibodies, Cy3-conjugated goat anti-mouse (1:200; Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, Pennsylvania, United States) or AlexaFluor 594-conjugated chicken anti-rabbit (1:200) respectively. Cells were washed in PBS, counterstained with DAPI, and mounted in Vectashield. In experiments in which GFP fusions were used, AQP2 was probed using the antibody combination used for kidney immunohistochemistry in order to detect the AQP2 at 594 nm, to distinguish between the GFP fusion proteins.
16121255	MDCK stable cell lines expressing vector alone, wild-type AQP2, or AQP2-F204V (and in some cases transiently expressing a GFP construct) were grown on fibronectin-coated coverslips until tight junctions formed. Cells were treated with or without 150 μM forskolin for 90 min, and fixed in methanol at −20 °C. Subsequently, cells were washed and permeabilized in 0.2% Triton X-100 for 5 min, and sequentially probed for AQP2 and organelle markers for either the PM or the <andsystem-candidate>. AQP2 was detected using goat anti-AQP2 (1:100; Santa Cruz Biotechnology; #sc-9882) and a 1:200 dilution of AlexaFluor 488-conjugated donkey anti-goat secondary antibody. The PM and ER were probed using mouse anti-Na+/K+-ATPase (Upstate, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States) or rabbit anti-calnexin (Stressgen Biotechnology, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada) antibodies and the secondary antibodies, Cy3-conjugated goat anti-mouse (1:200; Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, Pennsylvania, United States) or AlexaFluor 594-conjugated chicken anti-rabbit (1:200) respectively. Cells were washed in PBS, counterstained with DAPI, and mounted in Vectashield. In experiments in which GFP fusions were used, AQP2 was probed using the antibody combination used for kidney immunohistochemistry in order to detect the AQP2 at 594 nm, to distinguish between the GFP fusion proteins.
16121255	(B) MDCK <andsystem-candidate> lines, stably transfected with constructs encoding mouse WT or AQP2-F204V, were treated with and without 150 μM forskolin for 90 min, after which cells were fixed, permeabilized, and subjected to immunocytochemistry. AQP2 is shown in green, and the basolateral marker Na+/K+-ATPase is shown in red, alongside the nuclear stain DAPI. The z-profile images were reconstructed from multiple z-sections, along the dotted line. Mutant AQP2 fails to localize to the cell surface upon forskolin stimulation. Rather, the perinuclear staining is consistent with an ER localization of mutant AQP2.
16121255	(B) MDCK cell lines, stably transfected with constructs encoding mouse WT or AQP2-F204V, were treated with and without 150 μM forskolin for 90 min, after which cells were fixed, permeabilized, and subjected to immunocytochemistry. AQP2 is shown in green, and the basolateral marker Na+/K+-ATPase is shown in red, alongside the nuclear stain DAPI. The z-profile images were reconstructed from multiple z-sections, along the dotted line. Mutant AQP2 fails to localize to the <andsystem-candidate> surface upon forskolin stimulation. Rather, the perinuclear staining is consistent with an ER localization of mutant AQP2.
16121255	(B) MDCK cell lines, stably transfected with constructs encoding mouse WT or AQP2-F204V, were treated with and without 150 μM forskolin for 90 min, after which cells were fixed, permeabilized, and subjected to immunocytochemistry. AQP2 is shown in green, and the basolateral marker Na+/K+-ATPase is shown in red, alongside the nuclear stain DAPI. The z-profile images were reconstructed from multiple z-sections, along the dotted line. Mutant AQP2 fails to localize to the cell surface upon forskolin stimulation. Rather, the perinuclear staining is consistent with an <andsystem-candidate> localization of mutant AQP2.
16121255	(C) The MDCK <andsystem-candidate> line expressing AQP2-F204V was grown on fibronectin-coated coverslips until tight junctions formed, at which point the cells were treated with 150 μM forskolin for 90 min. Cells were fixed, permeabilized, and sequentially immunoblotted for AQP2 (green) and calnexin (red), an ER marker. The merged image shows that AQP2-F204V colocalizes with the endoplasmic reticulum marker. Scale bar refers to 10 μm.
16121255	(C) The MDCK cell line expressing AQP2-F204V was grown on fibronectin-coated coverslips until tight junctions formed, at which point the cells were treated with 150 μM forskolin for 90 min. Cells were fixed, permeabilized, and sequentially immunoblotted for AQP2 (green) and calnexin (red), an <andsystem-candidate> marker. The merged image shows that AQP2-F204V colocalizes with the endoplasmic reticulum marker. Scale bar refers to 10 μm.
16121255	(C) Wild-type AQP2 rescues the localization defect of mutant AQP2. GFP fusions of either wild-type AQP2 (WT-GFP, top photomicrographs) or F204V AQP2 (F204V-GFP, bottom photomicrographs) were expressed in polarized MDCK stable <andsystem-candidate> lines expressing vector alone (vector, left photomicrographs) or AQP2-WT (right photomicrographs). Cells were stimulated with forskolin, processed for immunocytochemistry, and used to generate z-sectional images.
16121255	(D) Mutant AQP2 is present at the <andsystem-candidate> surface in cells coexpressing wild-type AQP2 (AQP2-WT). GFP fused to AQP2-F204V was expressed in MDCK cells expressing wild-type AQP2 or vector alone. Cells were stimulated with forskolin, and cell surface biotinylated proteins were precipitated then analyzed for the presence of wild-type AQP2 (arrow) and AQP2-F204V (arrowhead) by Western blot.
17078885	Congenital cardiovascular diseases are the most common form of birth defects in humans. A substantial portion of these defects has been associated with inappropriate induction, migration, differentiation and patterning of pluripotent cardiac neural crest stem cells. While TGF-β-superfamily signaling has been strongly implicated in neural crest <andsystem-candidate> development, the detailed molecular signaling mechanisms in vivo are still poorly understood.
17078885	We deleted the TGF-β type I receptor Alk5 specifically in the mouse neural crest <andsystem-candidate> lineage. Failure in signaling via ALK5 leads to severe cardiovascular and pharyngeal defects, including inappropriate remodeling of pharyngeal arch arteries, abnormal aortic sac development, failure in pharyngeal organ migration and persistent truncus arteriosus. While ALK5 is not required for neural crest cell migration, our results demonstrate that it plays an important role in the survival of post-migratory cardiac neural crest cells.
17078885	A considerable percentage of cardiac birth defects is caused by a failure in normal migration, differentiation or patterning of the cardiac neural crest (CNC). This subset of pluripotent neural crest stem cells forms in the dorsal aspect of the neural tube at the level of the mid-otic placode to the third somite [1]. Subsequently cardiac neural crest cells (CNCCs) delaminate, undergo a phenotypic transformation from an epithelial to mesenchymal <andsystem-candidate> type, and migrate latero-ventrally into the 3rd, 4th and 6th pharyngeal arch arteries (PAAs), where they contribute to the formation of the smooth muscle cell layer of endothelial structures derived from the aortic arch arteries [1-3]. A subset of CNCCs continues to migrate deeper into the aortic sac to form the aortico-pulmonary septum; a vital structure, which separates the pulmonary trunk from the aorta [4].
17078885	An indispensable role of CNCCs in the development of the cardiac outflow tract was originally demonstrated by pioneering studies of Kirby and coworkers [1], who showed that ablation of the CNC in the chick led to severe outflow tract (OFT) defects including persistent truncus arteriosus (PTA), mispatterning of the great vessels and outflow tract mal-alignments [5]. Early migratory CNCCs have been shown to retain a considerable degree of plasticity and their fate is largely controlled by instructional signals from local environments into which NCCs migrate [6]. Several recent studies have indicated that members of the TGF-β superfamily, i.e., TGF-βs and BMPs are likely candidates to provide some of these signals. Mice deficient in TGF-β2 display fourth aortic arch artery defects [7], while neural crest <andsystem-candidate> specific abrogation of TGF-β type II receptor (Tgfbr2) results in interruption of the aortic arch and PTA [8,9]. BMPs 6 and -7 are required for proper formation of the outflow tract cushions [10], while BMP type II receptor is needed for proper development of the conotruncal ridges [11]. Moreover, neural crest-specific deletion of the BMP type I receptors Alk2 and Alk3 has been shown to lead to defective aortico-pulmonary septation, among other cardiac defects [12,13].
17078885	TGF-β subfamily ligands signal via a receptor complex composed of two type II receptors and two type I receptors [14,15]. Ligand binding leads to phosphorylation and activation of type I receptors, which, in turn, phosphorylate and activate a specific set of downstream signaling molecules called Smads. In general terms, TGF-βs bind to the TGF-β type II receptor (TGFβRII) and TGF-β type I receptor (ALK5) activating TGF-β Smads (2 and 3), while BMPs bind to the BMP type II receptor and type I receptors ALK2, -3, or 6, activating BMP Smads (1, 5 and 8). However, it is likely that these signaling interactions are more complex in vivo, possibly allowing formation of heterotetrameric complexes composed of different type II and type I receptors [16]. In addition, recent studies have identified novel TGF-β-related ligands, which can bind to entire different combinations of receptors. For instance, growth and differentiation factors (GDFs) 8 and 9 can bind to Activin type II receptor and ALK5 to activate TGF-β Smads [17,18]. Therefore, we hypothesized that deletion of Alk5 in a specific <andsystem-candidate> lineage should reveal phenotypes which cannot be seen in comparable mutants lacking Tgfbr2. Indeed, we recently showed that neural crest cell specific Alk5 mutants display a unique spectrum of craniofacial developmental defects, e.g., cleft snout and severe mandibular hypoplasia [19]; these phenotypes were not seen in corresponding Tgfbr2 mutants [20]. To determine, whether ALK5 would also mediate unique non-redundant signaling events in cardiac neural crest cells, we focused on cardiac and pharyngeal phenotypes of mouse embryos lacking Alk5 specifically in neural crest cells. We discovered that in Alk5/Wnt1-Cre mutants, pharyngeal organs (thymus and parathyroid) fail to migrate appropriately. Moreover, the mutant embryos display severe aortic sac and pharyngeal arch artery defects, and failed aortico-pulmonary septation leading to PTA. Our data further suggest that at least some of these abnormal detected phenotypes result from a dramatic increase in apoptosis of postmigratory cardiac neural crest cells. These phenotypes differ remarkably from those seen in corresponding Tgfbr2 mutants, suggesting that ALK5 mediates a wider spectrum of signaling events than its classical binding partner TGFβRII in cardiac neural crest cells during cardiac and pharyngeal development.
17078885	Septation of the outflow tract lumen begins in a cranial-to-caudal direction, starting distally in the aortic sac and proceeding toward the heart [24]. Initially, the condensed mesenchyme derived from the NC forms in the base of the aortic sac between the origins of 4th and 6th PAAs. Subsequently, two prongs of the developing aortico-pulmonary (AP) septum extend into the truncal cushions and the aortico-pulmonary septation complex crosses the aortic sac cranially. In ink-injected control embryos at E11.5, a characteristic conotruncal transition separating the truncus and conus could be seen as a twisted configuration, resulting from a change in orientation of the truncal and conal cushions (Fig. 5). In contrast, in Alk5/Wnt1-Cre mutants the outflow tract appeared unusually straight, failing to demonstrate the distinct conotruncal transition (Fig. 5B,D). This assay also clearly showed a dramatic reduction in the size of the aortic sac. Histological analysis of control samples displayed the characteristic rotation of the aortic sac and truncal OFT at the level where the AP septation takes place and verified the presence of the distinctive condensed AP-septal mesenchyme, which gradually divided the OFT to the aorta and the pulmonary trunk (asterisks in Fig. 6A). R26R lineage tracing showed that this tissue is derived from the NC, while immunostaining for α-SMA showed differentiation into smooth muscle (Fig 6B). In Alk5/Wnt1-Cre mutants the characteristic rotation of the aortic sac and truncal OFT fails to take place (Fig. 6G–L), and a properly formed AP-septum was not detectable (Fig. 6G,H). R26R lineage tracing demonstrated that the defects were not due to failure of NCCs to reach the OFT region. NC-derived cells around the abnomally bifurcated aortic sac, the abnormally large sixth PAAs and the truncus demonstrated strong αSMA staining (Fig. 6H,J,L). Recently, we showed that the NC-specific mutants of the related type I receptor, Alk2, display PTA as well [12]. In Alk2/Wnt1-Cre mutants, the rotation of the aortic sac and truncal OFT failed to occur (Fig. 6M–R) as seen in Alk5/Wnt1-Cre mutants. However, in Alk2 mutants the 6th pair of the PAAs was grossly hypoplastic, and while the Alk2/Wnt1-Cre mutants displayed a noticeable amount of septal tissue between the 4th and 6th PAAs (Fig. 6M,N), the condensed septal mesenchyme lacking Alk2 failed to extend the prongs into the truncal cushions and to form the AP septum. Concurrently, the 6th PAAs were losing their patency, which may have further contributed to the failed AP septation (Fig. 6M,O,Q). While CNCCs managed to migrate to the aortic sac and the truncal cushion level (Fig. 6N,P,R), immunostaining for αSMA appeared much weaker when compared to controls and Alk5 mutants, implying that ALK2-mediated signaling is involved in smooth muscle <andsystem-candidate> differentiation as previously suggested [12]. To conclude, while both Alk2 and Alk5 mutants demonstrate a failure in both the rotation of the aortic sac and the truncal OFT, and in the formation of the AP septum, the pathogenetic mechanisms behind these defects appear remarkably different.
17078885	During the last few years the Wnt1-Cre transgenic driver line has proven to be a powerful tool for tissue-specific gene deletion in NCCs [12,13,27,28]. Using this approach, several studies have independently shown that the NC-specific deletion of the Tgfbr2 gene leads to a distinct set of calvarial, facial and cardiac defects [8,9,20,29]. Interestingly, these defects appear quite different both in the craniofacial and pharyngeal regions, including the heart, when compared to the corresponding mutants of Alk5, which encodes the TGF-β type I receptor, a prototypical binding partner of TGF-βRII [19] and the present study). While Tgfbr2/Wnt1-Cre mutants as well as mice deficient in Tgf-β2 display the PTA type A4 (truncus arteriosus with interrupted aortic arch [30]), Alk5/Wnt1-Cre mutants reported here demonstrate earlier patterning defects of the PAAs, which is particularly obvious in the 3rd pair of the PAAs. Moreover, the Alk5/Wnt1-Cre mutants display an abnormal patterning of the aortic sac and defective AP septation leading to PTA, reminiscent of type A2 (= truncus artriosus with no main pulmonary artery segment present [30]). However, our results also demonstrate that significant hypoplasia of the aortic sac leads to a severe shortening of the ascending truncal arch, which masks possible defects in derivatives of the 4th PAAs, i.e., interruption of the aortic arch. These observed differences are likely due to substantial apoptosis of Alk5-deficient post-migratory neural crest cells, which is clearly detectable at E10.5, whereas similar intense <andsystem-candidate> death has not been reported in Tgfbr2/Wnt1-Cre mutants[9].
17078885	We specifically studied apoptosis at the level of the aortic sac, where the AP-septum forms between the origins of 4th and 6th PAAs. Already at E10.5, we could see intense apoptosis among the postmigratory NCCs in the mesenchyme surrounding the aortic sac at the site where the prospective AP septum forms, i.e., this <andsystem-candidate> death precedes the AP septal defect seen in mutants. Although some NC-derived cells appeared to be differentiating to smooth muscle cells in the OFT (Fig. 6), we could never detect the AP septum forming in Alk5/Wnt1-Cre mutants between E10.5 and E11.5. These findings suggest that the pool of cells forming the AP septum is severely affected by the cell death. Moreover, it is likely that these cells forming the AP-septum die the before majority of them can differentiate to smooth muscle cells.
17078885	Several in vitro studies have suggested an indispensable role for TGF-β-signaling in differentiation of NCCs into smooth muscle cells. Moreover, a recent in vivo study suggested that mice lacking Tgfbr2 in CNCCs display defective NCC differentiation into αSMA-positive cells in the AP septum [9], although this result was later disputed by another study [8]. Our immunohistochemical staining of αSMA in the OFT unequivocally demonstrated that signaling via ALK5 is not required for smooth muscle differentiation in vivo. Moreover, it has been suggested that deletion of Tgfbr2 in NCCs leads to other phenotypic features reminiscent of those seen in the velocardiofacial/DiGeorge syndrome (VCF/DGS) [9] caused by a deletion of the so called DiGeorge critical region (DGCR) on chromosome 22q11 [34,35]. Our present results suggest that although many of the observed phenotypes seen in Alk5/Wnt1-Cre mutants superficially resemble those seen in VCF/DGS, a detailed examination shows that the NC-specific abrogation of Alk5 does not lead to VCF/DGS-like phenotypes. Firstly, while the pharyngeal organ migration fails in Alk5/Wnt1-Cre mutants, perhaps as a result of increased mesenchymal <andsystem-candidate> death in the pharyngeal region, both the thymus, thyroid and parathyroid seem to develop relatively normally on the histological level in these mutants. Secondly, the NCC death seen in Alk5 mutants affects a predominantly postmigratory population of NCCs, while genes located in the DGCR, i.e., Tbx1 and CrkL, control NCC survival earlier at E8.5-E10 by regulating proliferation of the secondary heart field (SHF), and endoderm expansion, which in turn provides survival signal for NCCs allowing them to populate the pharyngeal region [36-39].
17078885	NCC ablation in the chick has been shown to lead to PTA and to a failure of addition of myocardium from the secondary heart field [40]. It was suggested that the defective migration of cells from the secondary heart field to the OFT in turn resulted in shortening and inappropriate rotation of the OFT, leading to mal-alignment of the arterial pole with the ventricles [41]. While the detected OFT phenotype in Alk5/Wnt1-Cre mutants shared many similarities with that seen in the chick NC ablation models, e.g., PTA and the hypoplastic aortic sac, our current results suggest that the secondary heart field is not severely affected in Alk5 mutants (data not shown). Since we could not detect appropriate rotation of the OFT in neural crest-specific mutants of Alk5 or Alk2, it appears that cells derived from the NC, as well as those from the SHF, are mutually required for proper OFT rotation in mice. However, it appears that these two TGF-β/BMP type I receptors contribute to OFT rotation through different mechanisms. In Alk5 mutants there is very little, if any, detectable septal mesenchyme present, and thus it could be argued that in these mutants OFT rotation fails due to a lack of penetration of septal prongs into the cushion mesenchyme. In contrast, in Alk2/Wnt1-Cre mutants a sizeable septal mesenchyme could be seen, still without any obvious looping of the aortic sac and truncal OFT, suggesting that the mere presence of the septal mesenchyme, without correct smooth muscle <andsystem-candidate> differentiation, is not sufficient for OFT rotation.
17078885	In this study, we have deleted the TGF-β type I receptor (Alk5) gene specifically in the mouse neural crest (NC) <andsystem-candidate> lineage. Our data suggest that ALK5 is required cell autonomously in the NC to mediate non-redundant signaling events that are essential for appropriate patterning of the pharyngeal organs and cardiac OFT. The cardiac and pharyngeal defects observed in the NC-specific Alk5 mutants differ significantly from those seen in corresponding mutants lacking the TGF-β type II receptor, suggesting that signaling mediated by ALK5 is not limited to the classical TGF-β ligands during cardiac/pharyngeal development.
17078885	Embryos (E17) were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyhe for 14 hours, dehydrated and embedded in paraffin wax. Sections (7–8 um) were stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin (n≥3 for each genotype). For lineage tracing analyses, embryos were stained for β-galactosidase activity as described [43]. Briefly, the specimens (E11.0 – E11.5) were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 minutes at room temperature, washed 3 times for 10 minutes in the detergent wash and developed for 2–12 hours in X-gal solution (n≥3 for each genotype). For immunohistochemistry, fixed sections from tissues harvested at E10.5 – E11.5 were stained with monoclonal α-smooth muscle actin (DAKO), cleaved caspase-3 (<andsystem-candidate> Signaling) or phophohistone-H3 (Cell Signaling) antibodies. TUNEL assays were performed using the DeadEnd fluorometric TUNEL system (Promega). In each assay 3 or more embryos were analyzed for each genotype.
15760270	Several lines of evidence, based on the results of overexpression studies, indicate that PGC-1α is sufficient to promote mitochondrial biogenesis and regulate mitochondrial respiratory capacity. First, PGC-1α activates the transcription of mitochondrial uncoupling protein-1 (UCP-1) in BAT through interactions with the nuclear hormone receptors PPARγ and thyroid receptor [2]. Second, forced expression studies in adipogenic and myogenic mammalian <andsystem-candidate> lines demonstrated that PGC-1α activates mitochondrial biogenesis through a group of transcription factor targets including nuclear respiratory factors 1 and 2 (NRF-1 and -2) and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), key transcriptional regulators of mitochondrial DNA transcription and replication [8]. Third, studies in primary cardiac myocytes in culture and in the hearts of transgenic mice have demonstrated that overexpression of PGC-1α promotes mitochondrial biogenesis [10,16]. Lastly, forced expression of PGC-1α in skeletal muscle of transgenic mice triggers mitochondrial proliferation and the formation of mitochondrial-rich type I, oxidative (“slow-twitch”) muscle fibers [17]. Collectively, these results indicate that PGC-1α is sufficient to drive mitochondrial biogenesis.
15760270	A neomycin-based gene targeting vector was generated to delete exons 4 and 5 of the murine PGC-1α gene. The targeting event resulted in a 3′ homologous recombination with insertion of the remainder of the construct (Figure 1A). The insertion/recombination event was confirmed by Southern blotting and DNA sequencing. The insertion caused an exon 3 duplication between exons 5 and 6 that creates a coding region frameshift resulting in a premature termination at amino acid 255. Germline transmission of the mutant allele was confirmed using Southern blotting (Figure 1B) and PCR (unpublished data). The PGC-1α gene disruption resulted in an unstable transcript that could not be detected by RNA blot analysis in heart and other tissues in PGC-1α−/− mice (Figure 1C and unpublished data). Quantitative RT-PCR was utilized to further evaluate the efficacy of the gene targeting. For these studies, PCR primers were designed to amplify a region of the PGC-1α gene transcript containing the exon 5–6 border (predicted to be absent in PGC-1α−/− mice) or the exon 5–3 border (predicted to be present only in the PGC-1α−/− mice). The exon 5–6 amplicon was detected in heart and BAT of wild-type (WT) but not PGC-1α−/− mice (Figure 1D). Conversely, the exon 5–3 product was present only in PGC-1α−/− mice (Figure 1D). An exon 10–11 border amplicon (predicted to be present in both genotypes) was detected in WT and PGC-1α−/− mice, but was greatly diminished in the PGC-1α−/− mice, indicating that the mutant transcript is unstable. PGC-1α protein was not detected in whole <andsystem-candidate> (Figure 1E) or nuclear protein extracts (unpublished data) isolated from BAT of PGC-1α−/− mice under basal conditions or in response to cold exposure, a condition known to markedly induce the expression of PGC-1α in BAT. Smaller mutant PGC-1α proteins were also not detected by Western blot analysis (unpublished data). Lastly, expression of the genes encoding the other known PGC-1 family members, PGC-1β and PRC, was not significantly altered in heart of PGC-1α−/− mice (Figure 1C). Taken together, these results support the conclusion that the gene targeting event resulted in a PGC-1α null allele.
15760270	General histologic analyses were performed to begin to evaluate the mild growth defect found in postnatal heart and skeletal muscle of the PGC-1α−/− mice. There were no obvious abnormalities in cellularity, <andsystem-candidate> size, or extracellular matrix in the tissues of 1–2-mo-old PGC-1α−/− mice (unpublished data). Given the important role of PGC-1α in mitochondrial function and biogenesis, we examined mitochondrial ultrastructure in the relevant tissues. Electron microscopic analysis revealed fewer and smaller mitochondria in soleus muscle of PGC-1α−/− mice compared to sex- and age- matched PGC-1α+/+ controls (Figure 3A). Quantitative morphometry of the electron micrographs confirmed that the cellular volume density of soleus mitochondria was significantly lower in PGC-1α−/− mice compared to PGC-1α+/+ controls independent of changes in the myofibrillar component (Figure 3B). Consistent with a defect in mitochondrial biogenesis, we found a reduction in the expression of nuclear genes encoding proteins involved in mitochondrial electron transport (cytochrome c and cytochrome oxidase IV) and oxidative phosphorylation (beta subunit of ATP synthase) in soleus muscle of PGC-1α−/− mice compared with PGC-1α+/+ controls. In addition, the expression of Tfam, a known PGC-1α target involved in mitochondrial DNA replication/transcription, was diminished in PGC-1α−/− soleus, providing one potential mechanism for defective mitochondrial biogenesis (Figure 3C). In contrast to the results with soleus, no significant differences in mitochondrial ultrastructure or volume density were noted in heart or BAT of PGC-1α−/− mice (unpublished data).
15760270	Previous studies have implicated PGC-1α in several hepatic metabolic functions including fatty acid oxidation and gluconeogenesis [18,19,20,21]. Accordingly, the hepatic phenotype was evaluated under basal conditions and following a 24-h fast, a stimulus known to induce fatty acid oxidation and gluconeogenic rates in liver. Under basal fed conditions, the livers of the PGC-1α−/− mice appeared grossly normal and did not exhibit histologic abnormalities (unpublished data). However, following a 24 h-fast, the PGC-1α−/− mice exhibited marked hepatic steatosis as determined by gross inspection, oil red O staining, electron microscopy, and measurements of liver triglyceride (TAG) levels (Figure 7). There were no differences in plasma triglycerides or free fatty acids between the genotypes in fed or fasted states (unpublished data). To further investigate the mechanisms involved in the fasting-induced hepatic steatotic response, hepatocytes were isolated from PGC-1α−/− mice and WT controls. Oleate loading experiments revealed that the PGC-1α−/− hepatocytes accumulated neutral lipid to a significantly greater extent than the WT cells (Figure 8A). 3H-palmitate oxidation rates were significantly lower in PGC-1α−/− hepatocytes compared to PGC-1α+/+ hepatocytes under basal conditions and following exposure to oleate (Figure 8B). Taken together, these latter results indicate a <andsystem-candidate>-autonomous defect in PGC-1α−/− hepatocytes that results in an inability to maintain cellular lipid balance in the context of increased delivery of lipid such as occurs with fasting.
15760270	In surveying the tissues of the PGC-1α−/− mice, structural abnormalities of the brain were observed. Light microscopic examination of PGC-1α−/− brain tissue samples demonstrated a well-preserved cerebral cortical neuronal complement, a result confirmed by measurement of neuron density in sections of the parietal lobe (PGC-1α+/+, 1,261 ± 91 neurons/mm2 versus PGC-1α−/−, 1,299 ± 82 neurons/mm2; not significant). Patchy areas of microvacuolation involving the neuropil and individual pyramidal neurons of the deep layers of the cerebral cortex were noted in the PGC-1α−/− mice but not the PGC-1α+/+ mice (Figure 10A). Immunolocalization of an astrocytic marker, glial fibrillary acidic protein, failed to show an increase in numbers of astrocytic processes in PGC-1α−/− mouse cerebral cortex (unpublished data). The hippocampus also showed neuronal microvacuolation, albeit to a lesser degree than the parietal cortex. Microvacuolation of the neuropil and neurons of the PGC-1α−/− basal ganglia (caudate and putamen) was also noted in association with a patchy increase in the number and intensity of glial fibrillary acidic protein-immunoreactive astrocytic processes (unpublished data). Areas of microvacuolation also involved multiple brainstem regions. Only rare vacuolated Purkinje and granule <andsystem-candidate> neurons were identified in the PGC-1α−/− cerebellar cortex. Neither microglial proliferation nor perivascular lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrates were noted in the PGC-1α−/− CNS.
15760270	Ultrastructural examination of the PGC-1α−/− parietal cerebral cortex confirmed the presence of microvacuolated neurons and neuropil (Figure 10B). Vacuoles containing aggregates of membranous material were present in a subset of cortical neurons. Subcellular localization of the vacuoles was difficult to establish; some may represent vacuolated elements of the neuropil, material in phagocytic cells, presynaptic nerve terminals compressing the <andsystem-candidate>, or genuine intraperikaryal deposits.
15760270	A BAC genomic clone containing the murine PGC-1α gene, isolated from an Sv129 genomic library, was obtained from Incyte Genomics (Palo Alto, California, United States). A 3-kb region spanning exon 3 was amplified from the genomic clone. A 5′ primer was designed to amplify a fragment with the 5′ end beginning 732 bp upstream of exon 3 just upstream of an endogenous Kpn1 restriction site (5′-AGTTTCCTTAGCAACTTCATA-3′). The 3′ primer contained a BamH1 site engineered by mutating the bases shown in lowercase (5′-AAGGATTTTAgGATccCAGTAC-3′). A second fragment downstream of exon 5 was amplified. In this latter amplicon, Not1 and Xho1 sites were engineered into the 5′ and 3′ primers, respectively (5′-TGGAGTgcGGCCGCTGGGA-3′ and 5′-AAAGAGTCTCgAgAATAGTTTCT-3′). The fragments were cloned into p1339-PGK-Neomycin targeting vector. The construct was linearized with Xho1 and electroporated into RW4 ES cells (Sv129 derived) using G418 selection. The electroporation was performed by the Siteman Cancer Center ES <andsystem-candidate> Core at Washington University (St. Louis, Missouri, United States). The clones were screened by Southern blot using an Xba1 digest (see Figure 1A and 1B). One clone out of approximately 400 screened was positive for the homologous recombination on the 3′ end and an insertion on the 5′ end. This clone was injected into a C57BL6/J blastocyst. Chimeras were mated to C57BL6/J mice and germline transmission was confirmed by Southern blotting of tail DNA (see Figure 1B). All experiments were performed using sex- and age-matched or littermate controls as noted.
15760270	We would like to thank Deanna Young and Karen Hemker for help with mouse husbandry, Carolyn Mansfield for ES <andsystem-candidate> and mouse genotyping, Anthony Nardi for assistance with the studies to assess general activity and muscle strength, Bill Kraft for expert technical assistance with electron microscopy, Carla Weinheimer for performing cardiac catheterizations, Trey Coleman for performing the TAG assays, Krista Olson for expert technical assistance with the Langendorff method, and Mary Wingate for assistance with manuscript preparation. This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants RO1 DK45416, RO1 HL58427, PO1 HL57278, Digestive Diseases Research Core Center (P30 DK52574), Clinical Nutrition Research Unit Core Center (P30 DK56341), and K08 AG24844. SB is supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation. EDA is supported by the American Heart Association (Established Investigator) and RO1 HL70070.
15760270	(E) Western blot analysis using whole-<andsystem-candidate> protein extracts prepared from BAT under basal conditions and following exposure to 4 °C for 8 h. The signal shown was obtained with polyclonal anti-PGC-1α antibody [10]. An epitope-tagged PGC-1α, overexpressed in neonatal cardiac myocytes using an adenoviral vector (Ad-PGC-1α), is shown as a positive control. The Ponceau S stain of the protein gel is shown at the bottom.
15760270	(B) Quantitative morphometric measurements of the cellular volume density for the mitochondrial (<andsystem-candidate>) and myofibrillar (Myo) fractions based on analysis of electron micrographs (three sections from three animals per group). The bars represent mean ± SEM. * p < 0.05 compared to corresponding PGC-1α+/+ values.
15760270	(B) Quantitative morphometric measurements of the cellular volume density for the mitochondrial (Mito) and myofibrillar (<andsystem-candidate>) fractions based on analysis of electron micrographs (three sections from three animals per group). The bars represent mean ± SEM. * p < 0.05 compared to corresponding PGC-1α+/+ values.
15760270	(C) Gene expression data. The results of real-time PCR analysis of nuclear and mitochondrial genes involved in various components of mitochondrial metabolism and mitochondrial biogenesis: cytochrome C (Cyto c), ATP synthase β, Tfam, and cytochrome oxidase IV (<andsystem-candidate> IV). Eight littermate pairs were used for analysis at 1–2 mo of age and normalized to the WT value, which was assigned a value of 100, in each case. * p < 0.05 compared to corresponding PGC-1α+/+ values.
15760270	(B) 3H-palmitate oxidation rates. 3H-palmitate oxidation rates determined in hepatocytes isolated from PGC-1α+/+ and PGC-1α−/− mice under <andsystem-candidate> culture conditions containing BSA or BSA + 50 μM oleate (2:1 oleate/BSA ratio). Values were derived from ten sets of triplicates for each group using hepatocytes from 5 mice of each genotype. The bars represent mean oxidation rates (n = 100) normalized to the condition of PGC-1α+/+ in BSA alone. * p < 0.05 compared to the corresponding PGC-1α+/+ mice. † p < 0.05 compared to PGC-1α+/+ with BSA treatment.
15760270	L-CPT I, liver-type carnitine palmitoyltransferase; MCAD, medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase; SREBP, sterol regulatory element binding protein; SCD, steroyl-CoA desaturase; <andsystem-candidate>, fatty acid synthase; GPAT, glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase; DGAT, diacylglycerol acyltransferase
16109169	Huntington's disease (HD) is a dominantly inherited neurodegenerative disorder that is caused by CAG repeats in the HD locus that extend a polyglutamine tract in a ubiquitous HEAT domain protein called huntingtin [1]. The molecular mechanism by which the new property that is conferred on huntingtin by the polyglutamine expansion leads to the hallmark loss of striatal neurons in HD is not known. However, polyglutamine expansions in unrelated proteins that target distinct neuronal <andsystem-candidate> populations cause distinct 'polyglutamine' neurodegenerative disorders. This observation strongly suggests that the striatal cell specificity of the polyglutamine expansion in the context of huntingtin must be determined by some aspect of huntingtin's structure, subcellular location or activities [2].
16109169	Therefore, we, and others, set out to discover huntingtin's essential activities by studying the effects of huntingtin deficiency in the mouse. Inactivation of the mouse HD gene (Hdh) has shown that huntingtin is not required for <andsystem-candidate> viability, as evidenced by the survival of mouse embryonic stem cells and neurons that lack huntingtin [10-12]. However, huntingtin is needed at the level of the organism for proper mammalian embryonic development [10,13,14]. Complete lack of huntingtin results in developmental arrest during gastrulation, while severe reduction of huntingtin levels results in abnormal neurogenesis and perinatal lethality [15].
16109169	Analysis of huntingtin deficient Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos reveals that homozygous inactivation of the mouse HD gene does not overtly affect development until E7.0. By E7.5, mutant embryos exhibit a shortened primitive streak, reduced size and, by morphology, lack a node and head folds. Mutants are rapidly resorbed by E8.0 [10]. Importantly, the expression of huntingtin only in extraembryonic tissues in chimeras rescues this gastrulation phenotype, suggesting that huntingtin is required only in cells of the extraembryonic lineage and acts in a <andsystem-candidate> non-autonomous manner at this stage [16].
16109169	Impaired regional restriction of gene expression in huntingtin deficient embryos. X-gal staining of Nodal-LacZ embryos shows staining in endoderm near the node of normal embryos (A,C) but broad staining in mutant embryos (B, D), although expression is higher in the posterior. The tight node expression of Nodal in normal embryos (C) is lost in mutant embryos (D), consistent with the loss of a morphological node in the absence of huntingtin. Whole mount and in situ hybridization of E7.5 day embryos reveals that Fgf8 is detected in the proximal streak and is downregulated in cells migrating out of the streak in normal embryos (E,G). In contrast, Fgf8 remains highly expressed in mutant embryos (F,H). Transient expression of Gsc in the definitive endoderm overlying the prospective head region in normal embryos (I,K) is distinguished in other <andsystem-candidate> layers in normal embryos but remains unrestricted in mutant embryos (J,L). Earlier posterior expression of Gsc is also maintained in mutant embryos (J) while it is down-regulated in normal embryos (I). Embryos (A,B,E,F,G,H,I,K,L) are shown in a lateral view with anterior oriented to the left. Embryos (C,D) are in a posterior view.
16109169	Fgf8 signaling is also essential for normal gastrulation in the mouse embryo. Fgf8 is required for <andsystem-candidate> migration away from the primitive streak [30]. Expressed just prior to streak formation in the posterior epiblast and visceral endoderm, Fgf8 is restricted to the streak mesoderm at E7.5 in a decreasing proximal-distal gradient and is downregulated in cells shortly after they exit the streak (Fig. 3E,G). In Hdhex4/5/Hdhex4/5 embryos, Fgf8 expression is strongly expressed in the posterior region in the primitive streak and ectopically in the endoderm overlying the entire epiblast (Fig. 3F,H). However, streak derivatives appear to migrate normally as evidenced by the proper anterior expression of markers such as Otx2, Hnf3β and Hesx1 anteriorly (Fig. 1). Therefore, mutant embryos exhibit normal migration of streak derivatives but display impaired Fgf8 repression in mutant endoderm.
16109169	The cardinal features of complete Hdh inactivation that we observe are similar to the phenotypes that stem from the complete inactivation of the Polycomb group gene (Pc-g) Eed (embryonic ectoderm development). Indeed, complete deficiency for either huntingtin or the eed protein leads to abnormal streak development, lack of headfold formation, ectopic T, Evx1 and Nodal expression and disruption of anterior primitive streak mesoderm production [47]. Interestingly, Eed protein is also required for proper trophoblast development and normal maintenance of imprinted <andsystem-candidate>-inactivation and genomic imprinting [47-49], suggesting that these activities warrant investigation in huntingtin deficient embryos.
16109169	Thus, our observations provide unexpected starting-points in the search for huntingtin's precise molecular activities, which began with the discovery that this HEAT domain protein hosts the dominant polyglutamine property that is the fundamental basis of HD pathogenesis. In HD patients and in accurate genetic replicas, HD CAG knock-in mice, the dominant mutation specifically affects the major population of neurons in the striatum, without impairing huntingtin's essential activities in embryonic development [50-53]. Indeed, homozygous HD patients make no wild-type huntingtin, and, in the mouse, a single mutant Hdh allele's worth of mutant huntingtin can fully rescue huntingtin deficiency embryonic phenotypes [15,51]. The quest to understand the HD mechanism, therefore, is aimed at delineating the huntingtin activity that may explain the striatal <andsystem-candidate> specificity of the polyglutamine mutant version of huntingtin. One hypothesis is that huntingtin is normally involved in gene transcription, as proposed for NRSF/REST mediated BDNF expression [54]. Now, our finding that huntingtin can be absolutely necessary for the appropriate regulation of genes with dynamic expression patterns in vivo, provides a compelling reason to elucidate the cellular machinery that is necessary for huntingtin mediated gene regulation.
17608565	It has long been known that loss of the retinoblastoma protein (Rb) perturbs neural differentiation, but the underlying mechanism has never been solved. Rb absence impairs <andsystem-candidate> cycle exit and triggers death of some neurons, so differentiation defects may well be indirect. Indeed, we show that abnormalities in both differentiation and light-evoked electrophysiological responses in Rb-deficient retinal cells are rescued when ectopic division and apoptosis are blocked specifically by deleting E2f transcription factor (E2f) 1. However, comprehensive cell-type analysis of the rescued double-null retina exposed cell-cycle–independent differentiation defects specifically in starburst amacrine cells (SACs), cholinergic interneurons critical in direction selectivity and developmentally important rhythmic bursts. Typically, Rb is thought to block division by repressing E2fs, but to promote differentiation by potentiating tissue-specific factors. Remarkably, however, Rb promotes SAC differentiation by inhibiting E2f3 activity. Two E2f3 isoforms exist, and we find both in the developing retina, although intriguingly they show distinct subcellular distribution. E2f3b is thought to mediate Rb function in quiescent cells. However, in what is to our knowledge the first work to dissect E2f isoform function in vivo we show that Rb promotes SAC differentiation through E2f3a. These data reveal a mechanism through which Rb regulates neural differentiation directly, and, unexpectedly, it involves inhibition of E2f3a, not potentiation of tissue-specific factors.
17608565	The retinoblastoma protein (Rb), an important tumor suppressor, blocks division and death by inhibiting the E2f transcription factor family. In contrast, Rb is thought to promote differentiation by potentiating tissue-specific transcription factors, although differentiation defects in Rb null cells could be an indirect consequence of E2f-driven division and death. Here, we resolve different mechanisms by which Rb controls division, death, and differentiation in the retina. Removing E2f1 rescues aberrant division of differentiating Rb-deficient retinal neurons, as well as death in cells prone to apoptosis, and restores both normal differentiation and function of major <andsystem-candidate> types, such as photoreceptors. However, Rb-deficient starburst amacrine neurons differentiate abnormally even when E2f1 is removed, providing an unequivocal example of a direct role for Rb in neuronal differentiation. Rather than potentiating a cell-specific factor, Rb promotes starburst cell differentiation by inhibiting another E2f, E2f3a. This cell-cycle–independent activity broadens the importance of the Rb–E2f pathway, and suggests we should reassess its role in the differentiation of other cell types.
17608565	The simplicity of the retina makes it an ideal tissue to study neurogenesis. Its development proceeds through three overlapping steps starting with retinal progenitor <andsystem-candidate> (RPC) proliferation, followed by birth of post-mitotic retinal transition cells (RTCs, also referred to as precursors), and ending with terminal differentiation of seven major cell types (Figure 1A) [1]. RPCs are multipotent and exit the cell cycle to generate different RTCs at specific time periods in development [1]. This process of RTC “birth” requires coupling of differentiation and cell cycle exit. Once born, post-mitotic RTCs migrate and form different retinal layers. Rods and cones make up the outer nuclear layer (ONL); horizontal, bipolar, and amacrine cells, as well as Müller glia cell bodies, reside in the inner nuclear layer (INL); and ganglion and displaced amacrine cells form the ganglion cell layer (GCL) (Figure 1A). The outer plexiform layer (OPL) and inner plexiform layer (IPL) house synaptic connections separating the ONL/INL and INL/GCL, respectively.
17608565	The simplicity of the retina makes it an ideal tissue to study neurogenesis. Its development proceeds through three overlapping steps starting with retinal progenitor cell (RPC) proliferation, followed by birth of post-mitotic retinal transition cells (RTCs, also referred to as precursors), and ending with terminal differentiation of seven major cell types (Figure 1A) [1]. RPCs are multipotent and exit the cell cycle to generate different RTCs at specific time periods in development [1]. This process of RTC “birth” requires coupling of differentiation and cell cycle exit. Once born, post-mitotic RTCs migrate and form different retinal layers. Rods and cones make up the outer nuclear layer (ONL); horizontal, bipolar, and amacrine cells, as well as Müller glia <andsystem-candidate> bodies, reside in the inner nuclear layer (INL); and ganglion and displaced amacrine cells form the ganglion cell layer (GCL) (Figure 1A). The outer plexiform layer (OPL) and inner plexiform layer (IPL) house synaptic connections separating the ONL/INL and INL/GCL, respectively.
17608565	(A) Retinal development. At E11 the retina is a NBL of dividing RPCs (white circle, green nuclei). RPC <andsystem-candidate> bodies oscillate along processes as they progress through the cell cycle. By P0 the NBL contains both RPCs and post-mitotic RTCs (coloured circles, red nuclei) and is separated from the GCL by the IPL. By P8 there are no RPCs, fewer RTCs, an OPL, and more differentiated rods (r) and cones (c) in the ONL; horizontal (h), bipolar (b), Müller (m), and amacrine (a) cells in the INL; and ganglion (g) and displaced amacrine cells in the GCL. Development is complete by ~P18.
17608565	(B) Rb is thought to regulate <andsystem-candidate> cycle and apoptosis by repressing E2fs, but to promote differentiation by potentiating tissue-specific transcription factors. However, Rb loss could also perturb differentiation through the indirect effects of abnormal division or death, and/or through direct regulation of differentiation genes by E2fs.
17608565	The retinoblastoma protein (Rb) is critical for <andsystem-candidate> cycle exit during retinal transition cell birth. Rb knockout (KO) RTCs continue to proliferate inappropriately and some (rod, ganglion, and bipolar cells) die by apoptosis [2,3]. Rb controls the cell cycle by binding and inhibiting E2f transcription factors (E2fs) (Figure 1B), first defined as transcription factors that bind adenoviral E2 regulatory elements and subsequently shown to be critical cell cycle regulators [4,5]. E2fs bind to DNA as heterodimers with proteins of the related Tfdp family. E2f1, E2f2, and E2f3a are “activating E2fs” that are required for fibroblast division. They are strong transcriptional activators that can drive G0 fibroblasts into cycle, and are inhibited when bound to Rb [4,5]. Ectopic division in Rb KO embryos can be rescued to various extents in different tissues by knocking out E2f1, E2f2, or E2f3 [6–9], but which member(s) drive division in Rb KO RTCs is unknown. Other members of the family, such as E2f4 and E2f5, are known as “repressive E2fs” because they are weak activators and appear to be primarily involved in gene silencing in quiescent or differentiated cells.
17608565	Activating E2fs may also promote apoptosis in the Rb KO retina (Figure 1B). Originally, E2f1 was considered the primary pro-apoptotic member of the family [10]. However, this view was reevaluated when it was shown that either E2f1 or E2f3 deletion rescues apoptosis in the developing central nervous system (CNS) of Rb KO embryos [6,11]. Subsequently, CNS apoptosis was shown to be an indirect result of placental defects and probable hypoxia [12–14]. Indeed, E2f3-induced apoptosis in fibroblasts has recently been shown to require E2f1 [15]. Thus, it is controversial whether E2f3 is required for apoptosis of any Rb KO <andsystem-candidate> type. Determining which activating E2fs promote death in distinct Rb KO tissues requires conditional rather than germ line models of Rb deletion to avoid secondary indirect effects (such as hypoxia).
17608565	It has been known for many years that Rb loss perturbs neuronal differentiation [26–29]. However, prior work could not exclude the possibility that differentiation defects are simply an indirect consequence of abnormal division and death. If Rb does regulate differentiation directly it is unclear whether it does so in all or a subset of neurons. Moreover, the mechanism has never been solved. In other <andsystem-candidate> types where Rb may promote differentiation directly, such as muscle and bone, it seems to do so through E2f-independent means by potentiating tissue-specific transcription factors (Figure 1B) [30–33]. In the retina, others have noted abnormally shaped Rb KO rods and have suggested Rb may directly promote their morphogenesis by activating retina-specific factors [29]. However, differentiation defects in any Rb KO neuron could be an indirect effect of ectopic division and/or apoptosis (Figure 1B). Thus, it is critical to study differentiation of Rb KO cells in the absence of ectopic proliferation and death.
17608565	To measure ectopic <andsystem-candidate> division, mice were pulse-labelled with bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) 2 h before sacrifice and the peripheral retina analyzed for BrdU incorporation by immunofluorescence. As reported before [2,3], Rb KO retinas exhibited both spatial and temporal ectopic DNA synthesis (Figures 1C and S1A). This is easily detected at E14, E16, and postnatal day (P) 0 in the inner retina where abnormal BrdU+ ganglion and amacrine RTCs are located, or on the outermost region of the P0 retina, where BrdU+ photoreceptor RTCs reside (Figures S1A and S2, arrows) [2]. Ectopic RTC division in Rb KO retinas is even more obvious at P8 or P18, when division is completed in wild-type (WT) retina (Figures 1C and S1A). Strikingly, the ectopically positioned S-phase cells at E14, E16, and P0 and all the abnormal division at P8 and P18 were completely suppressed in the Rb/E2f1 DKO retina (Figures 1C, 1E, 1F, S1A, and S2). In contrast, deletion of E2f2 or E2f3 had no effect at any stage of development. Analysis of mitotic cells with anti–phosphohistone 3 (PH3)–specific antibodies confirmed that loss of E2f1, but not E2f2 or E2f3, suppressed ectopic division (Figure S3). Deleting one E2f1 allele partially suppressed ectopic S-phase and mitosis in Rb KO RTCs (Figures 1C, 1E, 1F, S1A, S2, and S3), suggesting that E2f1 drives ectopic division in Rb KO RTCs in a dose-dependent fashion. These data contrast with previous findings in the lens and CNS of Rb KO embryos, where deletion of any activating E2f suppresses ectopic division to some extent [6–9].
17608565	Loss of Rb in the retina results in considerable RTC apoptosis, eliminating most bipolar and ganglion cells as well as many rods (Figure 2A–2D) [2,3]. The loss of Rb KO rods is evident from the thinner ONL, and the death of these cells as well as bipolar and ganglion neurons can be detected directly by double labelling for apoptotic and <andsystem-candidate>-type-specific markers [2] (M. P. and R. B., unpublished data). Loss of peripheral Rb KO ganglion cells is also evident from thinning of the optic nerve (D. C. and R. B., unpublished data). Deleting E2f1, but not E2f2 or E2f3, blocked this ectopic cell death in a dose-dependent fashion (Figures 1D, 1G, and S1B).
17608565	To investigate the molecular mechanism that underlies the unique role of E2f1, we assessed the expression of known E2f targets as well as other genes that regulate the <andsystem-candidate> cycle and apoptosis. Numerous positive and negative cell cycle and apoptotic regulators were up-regulated in the Rb KO retina (Figure 1H). Among the E2f family, E2f1, E2f2, E2f3a, and E2f7 were induced following Rb loss, but E2f3b, E2f4, and E2f5 were unaffected. Consistent with the BrdU and terminal dUTP nick-end labelling (TUNEL) analyses, E2f1 deletion specifically reversed all these molecular defects, but E2f3 deletion had no effect (Figure 1H).
17608565	Because E2f1 deletion blocks abnormal division and death in the Rb KO retina, the Rb/E2f1 DKO retina provided a unique opportunity to evaluate whether Rb controls differentiation independent of <andsystem-candidate> cycle effects. The Rb/E2f1 DKO retina had many Sag+ (S-antigen/rod arrestin) photoreceptors, Pou4f2+ (Brn3b) ganglion cells, and numerous Prkca+/Cabp5+ bipolar neurons (Figure 2A–2D). In contrast, there was no such rescue of cell types in Rb/E2f2 or Rb/E2f3 DKO retinas (Figure S4). Analysis with general neuronal markers Mtap2 (MAP2) and Snap25, as well as other markers expressed in bipolar cells (Chx10, Rcvrn, Vsx1, Tacr3, and Atp2b1) and rod photoreceptors (Rho and Rcvrn) confirmed rescue of the Rb/E2f1 DKO retina (Table S1). Moreover, neurons exhibited the same complex morphology as in WT retina. Bipolar cell bodies were located in the INL and had ascending and descending processes ending in the OPL and IPL, respectively (Figure 2A). In addition, the Rb/E2f1 DKO retina had a healthy appearing ONL consisting of morphologically normal rods with descending processes ending in the OPL and ascending processes that terminated in inner and outer segments (Figure 2A). It was suggested that Rb might regulate photoreceptor differentiation, possibly through rod-specific transcription factors (Figure 1B) [29]. However, if Rb does regulate photoreceptor differentiation, it does so by inhibiting E2f1, not by potentiating rod differentiation factors, such as Otx2, Crx, or Nrl. It is impossible to tell whether E2f1 perturbs differentiation directly, by affecting the expression of genes that modulate maturation, and/or indirectly through its effects on proliferation and survival (Figure 1B).
17608565	Because E2f1 deletion blocks abnormal division and death in the Rb KO retina, the Rb/E2f1 DKO retina provided a unique opportunity to evaluate whether Rb controls differentiation independent of cell cycle effects. The Rb/E2f1 DKO retina had many Sag+ (S-antigen/rod arrestin) photoreceptors, Pou4f2+ (Brn3b) ganglion cells, and numerous Prkca+/Cabp5+ bipolar neurons (Figure 2A–2D). In contrast, there was no such rescue of cell types in Rb/E2f2 or Rb/E2f3 DKO retinas (Figure S4). Analysis with general neuronal markers Mtap2 (MAP2) and Snap25, as well as other markers expressed in bipolar cells (Chx10, Rcvrn, Vsx1, Tacr3, and Atp2b1) and rod photoreceptors (Rho and Rcvrn) confirmed rescue of the Rb/E2f1 DKO retina (Table S1). Moreover, neurons exhibited the same complex morphology as in WT retina. Bipolar <andsystem-candidate> bodies were located in the INL and had ascending and descending processes ending in the OPL and IPL, respectively (Figure 2A). In addition, the Rb/E2f1 DKO retina had a healthy appearing ONL consisting of morphologically normal rods with descending processes ending in the OPL and ascending processes that terminated in inner and outer segments (Figure 2A). It was suggested that Rb might regulate photoreceptor differentiation, possibly through rod-specific transcription factors (Figure 1B) [29]. However, if Rb does regulate photoreceptor differentiation, it does so by inhibiting E2f1, not by potentiating rod differentiation factors, such as Otx2, Crx, or Nrl. It is impossible to tell whether E2f1 perturbs differentiation directly, by affecting the expression of genes that modulate maturation, and/or indirectly through its effects on proliferation and survival (Figure 1B).
17608565	As with ectopic division and apoptosis (Figure 1C and 1D), the rescue of Rb KO retinal bipolar, ganglion, and rod cells was dependent on E2f1 dose (Figure 2A–2D). Separate from its role in driving ectopic division of Rb KO RTCs, E2f1 also promotes normal RPC division since in its absence RPC proliferation drops ~2-fold (D. C. and R. B., unpublished data). This modest reduction of RPC numbers in the absence of E2f1 accounts for the slight reduction in the number of ganglion cells at P0, in the number of bipolar cells at P18 or P30, and in the thickness of the ONL at P18 or P30 in the E2f1 KO and Rb/E2f1 DKO retina (Figure 2B–2D). The morphology of E2f1 KO neurons was WT (Figure 2A). Despite a slight drop in absolute <andsystem-candidate> numbers, the proportion of Rb/E2f1 DKO and E2f1 KO bipolar cells was the same as WT (data not shown). Slightly reduced cell numbers were not due to residual RTC death since we have not observed ectopic apoptosis at any embryonic or postnatal stage in the developing Rb/E2f1 DKO retina (Figures 1D, 1G, and S2). Moreover, deleting Ccnd1, which acts upstream of Rb proteins, also reduces RPC number, but does not suppress any defect in the Rb KO retina (D. C. and R. B., unpublished data). Thus, slightly reduced RPC division and dramatic rescue of severe defects in Rb KO RTCs are distinct effects stemming from the deletion of E2f1.
17608565	Responses to dim light in dark-adapted (scotopic) conditions specifically assess the rod system, and were defective in the Rb KO retina (Figure 2E). The substantial reduction of both a- and b-waves is consistent with rod and bipolar <andsystem-candidate> apoptosis [2]. The sensitivity of the residual response appeared unchanged, suggesting it arose from the Cre-negative portions of the retina. Responses were about the same in the WT and E2f1 KO retina, and, most importantly, also the Rb/E2f1 DKO response median lay at the lower end of the normal range for most intensities (Figure 2F). Thus, E2f1 deletion almost completely rescued the rod system in the Rb KO retina.
17608565	Light-adapted (photopic) recordings to specifically assess the cone system yielded comparable results. Cones represent only 3% of photoreceptors and, unlike rods, develop without Rb, but they require rods for survival, and in the Rb KO retina, they have abnormal morphology and their synaptic targets, bipolar cells, are much depleted [2]. The photopic response, a product of cone and mainly bipolar activity, was much reduced by Rb loss, but was rescued considerably in the Rb/E2f1 DKO retina (Figure S5). Again, the median amplitude lay at the lower end of the E2f1 KO range. The photopic response in E2f1 KO mice was slightly reduced relative to WT (Figure S5B), possibly because E2f1 is required for maximal expansion of embryonic RPCs, and the E2f1 KO retina has, as noted earlier, slightly fewer cells than the WT retina, although <andsystem-candidate> type proportions are unaffected (D. C. and R. B., unpublished data). Thus, marginally subnormal photopic responses in the Rb/E2f1 DKO retina can be attributed to both a reduction of cone numbers in E2f1 KO mice alone, and a “genuine” slight reduction in cone function attributable to Rb loss relative to WT. This slight effect may relate to a true differentiation defect in a subset of amacrine cells discussed below. This discussion should not obscure the major outcome that E2f1 deletion recovers most of the ERG response. Thus, E2f1 deletion not only rescues morphology but also both rod and cone system function in the Rb KO retina.
17608565	ERGs primarily assess photoreceptor and bipolar <andsystem-candidate> function, but may miss differentiation defects in other cells. To test for subtle differences we stained the Rb/E2f1 DKO retina with 43 markers (Table S1). Thirty-two proteins displayed identical patterns in WT, E2f1 KO, and Rb/E2f1 DKO retina (Table S1). The other 11 markers revealed a cell-cycle– and apoptosis-independent differentiation defect in SACs. We first studied Calb2 (calretinin), which marks a subset of amacrine and ganglion cell bodies as well as three tracks corresponding to their processes in the IPL (Figure 3A). Normal Calb2 staining was seen in the E2f1 KO IPL (data not shown). However, only one Calb2+ track was evident in the Rb KO IPL, and this defect was not rescued in the Rb/E2f1 DKO retina (Figure 3A). We quantified Calb2+ cell bodies in the Rb KO INL (corresponding to amacrine cell staining only) and observed a reduction from P8 onwards (Figures 3C and S6).
17608565	ERGs primarily assess photoreceptor and bipolar cell function, but may miss differentiation defects in other cells. To test for subtle differences we stained the Rb/E2f1 DKO retina with 43 markers (Table S1). Thirty-two proteins displayed identical patterns in WT, E2f1 KO, and Rb/E2f1 DKO retina (Table S1). The other 11 markers revealed a cell-cycle– and apoptosis-independent differentiation defect in SACs. We first studied Calb2 (calretinin), which marks a subset of amacrine and ganglion <andsystem-candidate> bodies as well as three tracks corresponding to their processes in the IPL (Figure 3A). Normal Calb2 staining was seen in the E2f1 KO IPL (data not shown). However, only one Calb2+ track was evident in the Rb KO IPL, and this defect was not rescued in the Rb/E2f1 DKO retina (Figure 3A). We quantified Calb2+ cell bodies in the Rb KO INL (corresponding to amacrine cell staining only) and observed a reduction from P8 onwards (Figures 3C and S6).
17608565	(C) Quantification of dense Calb2+ <andsystem-candidate> bodies in the INL, total Slc18a3+ cell bodies, and Camk2a+ cell bodies in the INL. Error bars represent SD of measurements from three animals, and asterisks indicate significant differences between retinas of WT and the indicated genotypes (*, p <0.05; **; p <0.01; ANOVA and Tukey HSD test).
17608565	Of the three Calb2+ tracks in the IPL, the two outer tracks are from SACs, named after their extensive dendritic-tree-like morphology [37]. SACs are cholinergic, represent ~5.2% of amacrine neurons [38], and are critical for both direction selectivity [34,35] and spontaneous rhythmic activity that occurs during normal retinal development [36]. SACs in the INL synapse in the OFF layer of the IPL that responds to decreasing light, while displaced SACs in the GCL have processes that synapse in the nearby ON layer of the IPL that responds to increasing light (reviewed in [39]). Mature SAC processes stain specifically for Slc18a3 (vesicular acetyl choline transporter, VAChT) [37], and, significantly, this marker was absent in the peripheral Rb KO or Rb/E2f1 DKO P18 retina (Figures 3A and S7B). Chat, expressed from the same locus, is also SAC specific, but marks both <andsystem-candidate> bodies and processes of mature SACs [37]. Chat was seen in fewer cells in the mature Rb KO retina, and was present in the soma but absent from processes (Figure 3B). We obtained similar results for Sv2c, a synaptic vesicle protein found in SACs [40]; Kcnc1b and Kcnc2, potassium channels expressed on SAC soma and dendrites as well as a very small number of ganglion cells [41]; gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), an inhibitory neurotransmitter present in about half of amacrine cells including SACs, as well as horizontal and some bipolar neurons [37]; and Calb1 (calbindin), which is expressed in many amacrine cells and labels SAC process faintly (Figure S7A and S7B; Table S1; and data not shown). Finally, we also examined the effect of Rb deletion on SAC differentiation using a Chx10-Cre transgene that is expressed in a mosaic pattern across the retina, generating patches of Cre-expressing cells [42]. Consistent with the mosaic deletion pattern, we observed markedly reduced Chat/Slc18a3 staining in the IPL of Chx10-Cre;RbloxP/loxP retina compared to WT (Figure S7C). Together, these results suggest a role for Rb in SAC differentiation.
17608565	Of the three Calb2+ tracks in the IPL, the two outer tracks are from SACs, named after their extensive dendritic-tree-like morphology [37]. SACs are cholinergic, represent ~5.2% of amacrine neurons [38], and are critical for both direction selectivity [34,35] and spontaneous rhythmic activity that occurs during normal retinal development [36]. SACs in the INL synapse in the OFF layer of the IPL that responds to decreasing light, while displaced SACs in the GCL have processes that synapse in the nearby ON layer of the IPL that responds to increasing light (reviewed in [39]). Mature SAC processes stain specifically for Slc18a3 (vesicular acetyl choline transporter, VAChT) [37], and, significantly, this marker was absent in the peripheral Rb KO or Rb/E2f1 DKO P18 retina (Figures 3A and S7B). Chat, expressed from the same locus, is also SAC specific, but marks both cell bodies and processes of mature SACs [37]. Chat was seen in fewer cells in the mature Rb KO retina, and was present in the <andsystem-candidate> but absent from processes (Figure 3B). We obtained similar results for Sv2c, a synaptic vesicle protein found in SACs [40]; Kcnc1b and Kcnc2, potassium channels expressed on SAC soma and dendrites as well as a very small number of ganglion cells [41]; gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), an inhibitory neurotransmitter present in about half of amacrine cells including SACs, as well as horizontal and some bipolar neurons [37]; and Calb1 (calbindin), which is expressed in many amacrine cells and labels SAC process faintly (Figure S7A and S7B; Table S1; and data not shown). Finally, we also examined the effect of Rb deletion on SAC differentiation using a Chx10-Cre transgene that is expressed in a mosaic pattern across the retina, generating patches of Cre-expressing cells [42]. Consistent with the mosaic deletion pattern, we observed markedly reduced Chat/Slc18a3 staining in the IPL of Chx10-Cre;RbloxP/loxP retina compared to WT (Figure S7C). Together, these results suggest a role for Rb in SAC differentiation.
17608565	The above findings could indicate a defect in SAC specification, SAC survival, or the levels and/or transport of the markers described above. Camk2a marks both SACs and ganglion cells [37], but because ganglion cells are eliminated in the Rb KO retina, Camk2a is a specific SAC marker in this context. Importantly, Camk2a+ tracks and dendrites were present in both the WT and Rb KO retina (Figure 3B), and the number of Camk2a+ <andsystem-candidate> was similar in WT and Rb KO retina at P30 and beyond, although fewer cells stained in Rb KO retina at P18, suggesting a delay in its appearance (Figures 3C and S6B). Thus, Rb is not required for SAC survival or for process outgrowth, but rather it seems to regulate the expression and/or stability of Calb2, Calb1, Chat, Slc18a3, Sv2c, Kcnc1b, Kcnc2, and GABA in SACs, but leaves Camk2a expression virtually unaffected. The presence of Chat in some cell bodies but never in processes (Figure 3B) also suggests a transport defect. The developmental pattern of Slc18a3 expression also supported this notion. In mature WT SACs Slc18a3 is only in processes, but in early postnatal SACs, it is found in the cell body, and moves into emerging processes at approximately P4–P6. As noted above, Slc18a3 was absent at P18 in the Rb KO retina (Figure 3A); at P4 or P5 it was in cell bodies, yet was rarely present in Rb KO processes (Figures 4A and S6). Slc18a3 became virtually undetectable in Rb KO SACs by P8 (Figures 3C and S6C). These data suggest that Rb affects both the synthesis/stability and transport of SAC markers.
17608565	The above findings could indicate a defect in SAC specification, SAC survival, or the levels and/or transport of the markers described above. Camk2a marks both SACs and ganglion cells [37], but because ganglion cells are eliminated in the Rb KO retina, Camk2a is a specific SAC marker in this context. Importantly, Camk2a+ tracks and dendrites were present in both the WT and Rb KO retina (Figure 3B), and the number of Camk2a+ soma was similar in WT and Rb KO retina at P30 and beyond, although fewer cells stained in Rb KO retina at P18, suggesting a delay in its appearance (Figures 3C and S6B). Thus, Rb is not required for SAC survival or for process outgrowth, but rather it seems to regulate the expression and/or stability of Calb2, Calb1, Chat, Slc18a3, Sv2c, Kcnc1b, Kcnc2, and GABA in SACs, but leaves Camk2a expression virtually unaffected. The presence of Chat in some <andsystem-candidate> bodies but never in processes (Figure 3B) also suggests a transport defect. The developmental pattern of Slc18a3 expression also supported this notion. In mature WT SACs Slc18a3 is only in processes, but in early postnatal SACs, it is found in the cell body, and moves into emerging processes at approximately P4–P6. As noted above, Slc18a3 was absent at P18 in the Rb KO retina (Figure 3A); at P4 or P5 it was in cell bodies, yet was rarely present in Rb KO processes (Figures 4A and S6). Slc18a3 became virtually undetectable in Rb KO SACs by P8 (Figures 3C and S6C). These data suggest that Rb affects both the synthesis/stability and transport of SAC markers.
17608565	(A) Horizontal retinal sections of the indicated ages and genotypes were stained for nuclei (DAPI, blue), mitosis marker PH3 (green), and Slc18a3 (red), which marks SAC <andsystem-candidate> at early stages and processes from ~P5 onwards. Arrows show mitotic PH3+ nuclei in Rb KO, Rb/E2f2 DKO, and Rb/E2f3 DKO retinas. E2f1 loss rescues the ectopic mitosis and cell death defects, but not the SAC defect. E2f2 loss has no effect. E2f3 loss does not rescue the ectopic mitosis and cell loss defects, but rescues the SAC defect. Inactivating E2f1 and E2f3 together rescues the ectopic mitosis, cell death, and SAC defects.
17608565	(A) Horizontal retinal sections of the indicated ages and genotypes were stained for nuclei (DAPI, blue), mitosis marker PH3 (green), and Slc18a3 (red), which marks SAC soma at early stages and processes from ~P5 onwards. Arrows show mitotic PH3+ nuclei in Rb KO, Rb/E2f2 DKO, and Rb/E2f3 DKO retinas. E2f1 loss rescues the ectopic mitosis and <andsystem-candidate> death defects, but not the SAC defect. E2f2 loss has no effect. E2f3 loss does not rescue the ectopic mitosis and cell loss defects, but rescues the SAC defect. Inactivating E2f1 and E2f3 together rescues the ectopic mitosis, cell death, and SAC defects.
17608565	Rb binds more than 100 proteins [43] and in some non-neuronal cells, such as skeletal muscle, adipocytes, and bone, Rb is thought to bind and potentiate tissue-specific transcription factors that promote differentiation [31–33]. Thus, we expected that Rb might interact with retina-specific factors to facilitate SAC differentiation. A direct role for E2f in mediating Rb-dependent differentiation defects (independent of <andsystem-candidate> cycle or death defects) has to our knowledge not been described, but because E2f can regulate some differentiation genes [44–48], we first tested whether E2f2 or E2f3 might perturb Rb KO SAC maturation. At multiple time points, E2f1 deletion suppressed ectopic mitosis (PH3+ cells), but did not reverse the SAC defect, and E2f2 deletion had no effect on either defect (Figure 4A). Remarkably, although E2f3 deletion did not reverse ectopic mitosis, it rescued Calb2, Slc18a3, Chat, GABA, Kcnc1b, Kcnc2, and Sv2c staining at multiple times (Figure 4A and data not shown). Rb/E2f3 DKO SAC tracks were slightly more disordered than in WT retina, most likely because of the absence of synaptic partner cells, which are killed by E2f1. Indeed, this minor defect was rescued in the Rb/E2f1/E2f3 triple knockout retina, where bipolar and ganglion cell death was rescued and SAC differentiation was restored (Figure 4A). E2f3 deletion alone did not affect SAC differentiation (Figure 4A); thus, it is unleashed E2f3 activity that is detrimental, and the critical role for Rb is to inhibit E2f3.
17608565	To quantify the effect of different E2fs on ectopic division specifically in SACs, we exploited Isl1 (Islet1). This marker is expressed in both SACs and ganglion cells, thus Isl1+ cells in the INL are exclusively SACs [49]. We found that 98.2% ± 1.8% of Isl1+ cells in the forming inner INL at P5 were also Slc18a3+, confirming that Isl1 is an excellent SAC marker (Figure 4C). Moreover, Isl1, unlike Slc18a3, is nuclear, which facilitates scoring of Isl1+/Mki67+ cells. It is also expressed earlier than Slc18a3, permitting analysis of SACs soon after their birth at ~E15; thus, we could study retina at P0, a time when ectopic division is high in the inner retina and prior to Rb-independent <andsystem-candidate> cycle exit associated with terminal differentiation [2]. At P0, no WT Isl1+ cells in the inner neuroblastic layer (NBL) (which is the future INL) were dividing, but 57 ± 14 Isl1+/Mki67+ cells were detected in the Rb KO inner NBL (Figure 4D). Indeed, about one-third of all Isl1+ cells in the entire inner NBL were dividing in the Rb KO retina, or ~50% in the periphery where Cre is expressed (Figure 4E and data not shown). This defect was suppressed in the Rb/E2f1 DKO retina, where we detected only 1 ± 1 dividing SAC, but not the Rb/E2f3 DKO retina, where there were 53 ± 8 dividing SACs (Figure 4D and 4E). We observed similar effects at P0 with Calb2, which marks newborn SACs and other amacrine cells (data not shown). Thus, in Rb KO SACs, E2f1 deletion suppresses ectopic division but not aberrant differentiation, whereas E2f3 deletion suppresses aberrant differentiation but not ectopic division.
17608565	The unique effect of E2f3 in disrupting the differentiation of SACs but not other retinal neurons might be due to <andsystem-candidate>-type-specific expression or cell-type-specific activity of E2f3. Determining between these two possibilities is not easy, as E2f immunostaining in mouse tissues is problematic. We did not solve this issue for E2f1 or E2f2, but used a modified protocol [50] to successfully track E2f3 expression (Figure 5). At P0, E2f3 was detected in RPCs, consistent with a putative role in normal proliferation (Figure 5A). The signal was specific as it was absent in the E2f3 KO peripheral retina (Figure 5A). As the retina differentiated and RPC division diminished, the number of E2f3+ cells also dropped, and by P8, when division is virtually over, only a subset of post-mitotic cells in the inner retina expressed E2f3 (Figure 5A). By P18, E2f3 was also detected in two tracks in the IPL (Figure 5A and 5B), reminiscent of SAC markers such as Chat and Slc18a3 (c.f. Figures 3 and 4). This cytoplasmic E2f3 staining was also specific, as it was absent in the E2f3 KO peripheral retina of α-Cre;E2f3loxP/loxP mice (Figure 5A). Indeed, double labelling with E2f3 (red) and Chat plus Slc18a3 (green) confirmed that E2f3 is present in both SAC soma and dendrites (Figure 5B). Rb protein was also detected in the inner retina (Figure 5A), and showed a similar distribution as E2f3 in SACs (Figure 5B), and was also present in mature ganglion cells and Müller cells as reported [51]. Rb staining in SAC processes was specific as it was absent in the peripheral retina of αCre;RbloxP/loxP mice (Figure 5A). These data suggest that Rb and E2f3 colocalize in SACs and that E2f3 triggers defects in SAC differentiation because it is specifically expressed in these retinal neurons.
17608565	The unique effect of E2f3 in disrupting the differentiation of SACs but not other retinal neurons might be due to cell-type-specific expression or cell-type-specific activity of E2f3. Determining between these two possibilities is not easy, as E2f immunostaining in mouse tissues is problematic. We did not solve this issue for E2f1 or E2f2, but used a modified protocol [50] to successfully track E2f3 expression (Figure 5). At P0, E2f3 was detected in RPCs, consistent with a putative role in normal proliferation (Figure 5A). The signal was specific as it was absent in the E2f3 KO peripheral retina (Figure 5A). As the retina differentiated and RPC division diminished, the number of E2f3+ cells also dropped, and by P8, when division is virtually over, only a subset of post-mitotic cells in the inner retina expressed E2f3 (Figure 5A). By P18, E2f3 was also detected in two tracks in the IPL (Figure 5A and 5B), reminiscent of SAC markers such as Chat and Slc18a3 (c.f. Figures 3 and 4). This cytoplasmic E2f3 staining was also specific, as it was absent in the E2f3 KO peripheral retina of α-Cre;E2f3loxP/loxP mice (Figure 5A). Indeed, double labelling with E2f3 (red) and Chat plus Slc18a3 (green) confirmed that E2f3 is present in both SAC <andsystem-candidate> and dendrites (Figure 5B). Rb protein was also detected in the inner retina (Figure 5A), and showed a similar distribution as E2f3 in SACs (Figure 5B), and was also present in mature ganglion cells and Müller cells as reported [51]. Rb staining in SAC processes was specific as it was absent in the peripheral retina of αCre;RbloxP/loxP mice (Figure 5A). These data suggest that Rb and E2f3 colocalize in SACs and that E2f3 triggers defects in SAC differentiation because it is specifically expressed in these retinal neurons.
17608565	As noted above, E2f3 and Rb staining in SACs was both nuclear and cytoplasmic (Figure 5A and 5B). The antibody that worked in immunostaining recognizes a C-terminal region and thus, does not distinguish a/b isoforms. To our knowledge, the subcellular location of E2f3 isoforms has not been determined in any <andsystem-candidate> type. To verify the dual locations of E2f3 and to determine which isoforms were present in retina, we analyzed nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions by Western blot at different times during development. Analysis with the pan-E2f3 antibody (sc-878, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) detected a 55-kD E2f3a species and a 40-kD E2f3b polypeptide (Figure 6). To confirm that the upper species in our retinal lysates was E2f3a, we exploited novel mice that lack E2f3 exon 1a and thus express E2f3b exclusively (R. O. and G. L., unpublished data). The genotyping strategy is discussed in detail later and is outlined in Figure 7A. Western analysis confirmed that the upper band was absent in E2f3a−/− mice (Figures 6 and S8). Consistent with the drop in E2f3-expressing cells during WT retinal maturation (Figure 5A), the total amount of E2f3a was less at P18 compared to P0 (Figure 6). E2f3b was present in similar amounts at both time points. At P0 and P18, E2f3a was present in both nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions, but in marked contrast, E2f3b was exclusively nuclear at both times (Figure 6). Two closely migrating E2f3a bands were detected, more clearly evident at P18, of which the faster migrating species was dominant in nuclear and the slower species was dominant in cytoplasm (Figure 6). The identity of both as E2f3a species was confirmed by their absence in the P18 E2f3a KO retina (Figure S8). Analysis of Pou4f2, a nuclear transcription factor expressed in ganglion cells, showed that nuclear proteins had not contaminated the cytoplasmic fraction, and analysis of Slc18a3, a cytoplasmic SAC marker, confirmed that the reverse had also not occurred (Figure 6). These data show, to our knowledge for the first time, that E2f3a and E2f3b exhibit distinct patterns of subcellular distribution, and raise the possibility that E2f3a localization may be regulated by as yet unknown post-translational modifications.
17608565	Nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts from an equivalent number of retinal cells from mice of the indicated genotypes and ages were analyzed by Western blotting to detect the indicated proteins. Lysate from E2f3a−/− mice was used as a control to confirm the location of E2f3a protein. <andsystem-candidate>, cytoplasmic extracts; N, nuclear extracts.
17608565	Nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts from an equivalent number of retinal cells from mice of the indicated genotypes and ages were analyzed by Western blotting to detect the indicated proteins. Lysate from E2f3a−/− mice was used as a control to confirm the location of E2f3a protein. C, cytoplasmic extracts; <andsystem-candidate>, nuclear extracts.
17608565	We also examined the distribution of other <andsystem-candidate> cycle regulators during retinal development. Like E2f3a, Rb was present in both the WT cytoplasm and nucleus at P0, but at P18, when the levels of Rb had increased, it was primarily nuclear (Figure 6). A very faint cytoplasmic Rb signal was evident at P18, which is consistent with Rb staining of SAC processes (Figure 5B), and with the very small proportion of SACs in the retina [38]. E2f1 was also detected in both nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions, although unlike E2f3a it was predominantly nuclear both at P0 and P18 (Figure 6). The E2f dimerization partner, Tfdp1, which lacks a nuclear localization signal [54], was primarily cytoplasmic at both P0 and P18, and the Cdk inhibitors Cdkn1a and Cdkn1b showed a similar pattern of distribution (Figure 6). Thus, among the cell cycle regulators we examined, most showed bivalent distribution, and E2f3b was unusual in its solely nuclear compartmentalization.
17608565	To test which E2f3 isoform is responsible for aberrant Rb KO SAC differentiation we exploited E2f3a−/− mice (Figure 7A). The genotyping strategy outlined in Figure 7A was used to distinguish the E2f3a, WT, and null alleles. Reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) confirmed the presence of both E2f3a and E2f3b RNA species in the developing WT retina, and the specific absence of E2f3a RNA in the E2f3a−/− retina (Figure 7B). E2f3a protein was absent in E2f3a−/− retinal lysate (Figures 6 and S8). Importantly, the levels of E2f3b message were similar in the Rb KO and Rb/E2f3a DKO retina, ruling out the possibility that any effects of E2f3a deletion we might observe were due to down-regulation of E2f3b (Figure 7C). Also, the levels of other E2fs were the same in the Rb KO, Rb/E2f3 DKO, and Rb/E2f3a DKO retina, ruling out any cross-regulatory effects (Figure 7C) [55]. E2f3a can trigger <andsystem-candidate> cycle induction, but because SAC defects are not linked to cell cycle perturbation (Figures 3A and 4), and in view of the predominant association between E2f3b and Rb in quiescent cells [16,19], we suspected that E2f3b may perturb differentiation in Rb KO SACs. Unexpectedly, however, E2f3a deletion suppressed the Rb KO SAC defect (Figure 7D). Thus, separate from its role in cell cycle control, Rb regulation of E2f3a is critical to ensure proper neuronal differentiation.
17608565	Work in the early 1990s showed that Rb loss triggers defects in neuronal <andsystem-candidate> cycle exit, survival, and differentiation [26–28]. Much of the death is an indirect consequence of probable hypoxia linked to placental defects [12–14]. However, targeted KO and chimeric studies reveal that Rb autonomously promotes cell cycle exit in newborn neurons, and is required for survival of a subset of neurons, particularly in the retina [2,3,13,14,56–59]. However, whether Rb also regulates differentiation is obscured by potentially indirect effects of ectopic division and death. Moreover, a mechanism though which Rb may regulate neuronal maturation has not been elucidated.
17608565	Here, deleting E2f1 specifically rescued ectopic division and death in the Rb KO retina. Importantly, major Rb/E2f1 DKO neurons differentiated normally, and ERGs revealed the rescue of rod- and cone-mediated function, implicating a regular signal flow from photoreceptors to bipolar and amacrine cells. Division and death genes were induced in Rb KO cells, and deleting E2f1, but not E2f2 or E2f3, reversed these molecular events. E2f1 may also regulate differentiation targets, but whether this contributes to defects in retinal <andsystem-candidate> maturation is impossible to separate from potentially indirect consequences of deregulated division and death. In any case, it is clear that in most retinal cells, including photoreceptors [29], transcription factors that promote differentiation function independently of Rb.
17608565	We have also found that E2f1 deletion rescues <andsystem-candidate>-autonomous ectopic division, death, and differentiation defects in sporadic Rb KO clones generated using a Cre retrovirus vector (M. P. and R. B., unpublished data). These data are consistent with the observation that E2f1 overexpression in newborn photoreceptors drives ectopic division and apoptosis [60], and add to the growing evidence indicating that E2f1 is the major, and perhaps only, member of the three activating E2fs required to induce apoptosis in Rb KO cells [10,15]. Thus, deregulated E2f1 activity in the retina, whether resulting from the inactivation of Rb or from overexpression, promotes unscheduled cell division and triggers apoptosis in susceptible RTCs. E2f1, rather than other E2fs, may be a potential target for novel therapeutics to prevent retinoblastoma in RB1+/− humans.
17608565	Red text and arrows indicate Rb-dependent events. Black text and arrows indicate events for which there is no direct evidence of Rb involvement. Rb does not appear to temper RPC expansion and is not required for differentiation of RPCs into RTCs, but is essential to couple RTC birth to terminal mitosis, thus locking them out of cycle. Rb performs this function by inhibiting E2f1. Rb is also required for SAC differentiation, and in this case, acts by inhibiting E2f3a. There is no direct evidence that Rb is required for terminal differentiation of other <andsystem-candidate> types. Colour codes and abbreviations as in Figure 1A.
17608565	Rb regulation of SAC differentiation through E2f3 was independent of its role in controlling division or death: E2f3 deletion rescued Rb KO SAC defects but did not suppress aberrant proliferation or death, whereas E2f1 deletion reversed abnormal proliferation and death but did not rescue SAC differentiation. Double labelling confirmed that E2f1 but not E2f3 deletion reversed Rb KO SAC division. Moreover, deleting E2f1, but not E2f3, reversed deregulated expression of <andsystem-candidate> cycle and apoptotic genes in the Rb KO retina. E2f3 is expressed in a subset of CNS neurons (this work) and drives specific cell-cycle–independent defects in Rb KO forebrain neurons [53]. Thus, E2f3 inhibition is the first, and may be the only, mechanism by which Rb participates directly in neuronal differentiation.
17608565	Rb is critical to ensure that many types of terminally differentiating cells leave the <andsystem-candidate> cycle (e.g., neurons, gut and skin epithelia, muscle, and lens fibres) (reviewed in [66]). Early overexpression studies in vitro suggested Rb might temper expansion of cycling cells, but KO studies in vivo indicate that its major role is to block division in terminally differentiating cells. In its absence, many (but clearly not all) aspects of differentiation go ahead relatively unperturbed. In the retina, differentiating transition cells are born in the absence of Rb, migrate to the correct layer, and express appropriate markers ([2] and this work). In brain, Rb KO neurons migrate away from the ventricular zone and switch on Tubb3 (βIII-tubulin), but continue to incorporate BrdU [13], and in gut epithelia, differentiated enterocytes migrate up the villi and activate expression of serotonin, yet continue to incorporate BrdU [67]. In the case of SACs, the differentiation defects we observed (e.g., loss of Slc18a3 and Chat) were not due to aberrant division, but it is possible there are other problems with these cells that are caused by ectopic division. Nevertheless, it is clear that many aspects of differentiation in multiple cell types are compatible with ectopic division. However, division of terminally differentiating cells is dangerous, since it may facilitate transformation, as is the case in retinoblastoma (reviewed in [66]).
17608565	E2f3a could disrupt SAC differentiation through its well known role as a transcriptional activator, or, in view of the discovery that it is partially cytoplasmic, E2f3a may affect processes other than gene regulation. Both scenarios are feasible since E2fs regulate differentiation genes [44–48], and <andsystem-candidate> cycle regulators, such as Cdkn1b, have cytoplasmic activities that influence differentiation [68,69]. Many transcription factors shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm during neurogenesis (e.g., [70] and references therein). It may be difficult to identify E2f3a-specific target genes or cytoplasmic proteins in SACs since these neurons are a small proportion (<1%) of the total retina and only ~5.2% of amacrine neurons [38].
17608565	Others have suggested that Rb promotes differentiation in non-neuronal cells through E2f-independent means [31–33]. However, these studies did not assess whether these <andsystem-candidate> types differentiate normally if Rb is deleted along with one or more E2f family members. One study reported that Rb mutants that do not bind E2f still induce differentiation [30]. However, the binding assays were performed in solution, and we have found that several of these mutants do bind E2f, albeit weakly, on chromatin (T. Yu and R. B., unpublished data). It is possible that Rb-mediated potentiation of tissue-specific transcription factors may, at least in some cases, be a redundant activity, and that the only critical Rb function is to inhibit E2f. Our study is the first to our knowledge to assess comprehensively whether Rb KO cells can differentiate in the absence of different E2fs. In light of our findings, it will be important to reassess differentiation defects in other Rb KO tissues in the absence of individual and combined activating E2f family members.
17608565	The retina was separated into three bins by dividing the ventricular edge of the retina into equal parts and extending a line to the vitreal edge [2]. Bin 1 contains only cells that expressed Cre as progenitors; bin 3 is at central retina and contains cells derived from progenitors that did not express Cre. For <andsystem-candidate> counts or thickness measurement we used a region 0–100 μm peripheral to the boundary separating bins 1 and 2. Measurements were performed on an Axioplan-2 microscope using Axiovison software. Quantification of S-phase, M-phase, and apoptotic cells was performed on horizontal sections that included the optic nerve. Quantification of differentiated cell types was performed using horizontal sections at equal distances from the optic nerve. A minimum of three sections per eye and three eyes from different litters were counted.
17608565	Nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts from an equivalent number of retinal cells from mice of the indicated genotypes and ages were analyzed by Western blotting to detect the E2f3a protein. Lysates from E2f3a−/− mice of matched ages were used as a control to confirm the location of E2f3a protein. <andsystem-candidate>, cytoplasmic extracts; N, nuclear extracts.
17608565	Nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts from an equivalent number of retinal cells from mice of the indicated genotypes and ages were analyzed by Western blotting to detect the E2f3a protein. Lysates from E2f3a−/− mice of matched ages were used as a control to confirm the location of E2f3a protein. C, cytoplasmic extracts; <andsystem-candidate>, nuclear extracts.
16504174	Embryonic stem <andsystem-candidate>-specific gene (ESG) 1, which encodes a KH-domain containing protein, is specifically expressed in early embryos, germ cells, and embryonic stem (ES) cells. Previous studies identified genomic clones containing the mouse ESG1 gene and five pseudogenes. However, their chromosomal localizations or physiological functions have not been determined.
16504174	Embryonic stem (ES) cells were first derived from the blastocysts of mice in 1981 [1,2] and humans in 1998 [3]. ES cells have two important properties: theability to maintain pluripotency, which is the ability to differentiate into a wide variety of cells, and rapid proliferation. These characteristics make mouse ES cells an essential component of gene targeting technology. These qualitiesalso make human ES cells attractive sources for <andsystem-candidate> transplantation therapy to treat various diseases, including spinal cord injuries and juvenile diabetes. The molecular mechanisms underlying the pluripotency and rapid proliferation of ES cells are currently a major focus of the field of stem cell biology [4-6].
16504174	To determine the chromosomal localizations of the mouse ESG1 gene and pseudogenes, we performed a Blast analysis of the mouse genomic database with the ESG1 cDNA sequence as a query. We identified several putative pseudogenes without introns on chromosomes 1, 5, 11, 12, 14, 16, 17, and X (Figure 1). In addition, two intron-less pseudogenes were identified in DNA fragments for which the chromosomal localization remained unmapped. While these pseudodgenes have significant homology to ESG1 cDNA, they could not produce functional proteins, because of critical mutations. This result suggests that there are a larger number of intron-less pseudogenes than previously anticipated. Existence of multiple retropseudogenes is a hallmark of pluripotent <andsystem-candidate>-specific genes [18].
16504174	To study the function of ESG1, we deleted the gene by homologous recombination in mouse ES cells. We replaced the three exons with either a fusion of the neomycin-resistance and β-galactosidase genes (β-geo) or the hygromycin resistant gene (HygR) using two targeting vectors (Figure 4A) introduced into RF8 ES cells by electroporation. We obtained eight ES <andsystem-candidate> clones with correct homologous recombination of the β-geo targeting vector, which was confirmed by Southern blot analysis (Figure 4B). We obtained only one clone with correct homologous recombination of the HygR targeting vector.
16504174	Analyses of ESG1-null ES cells. A) The morphology of ESG1-null ES <andsystem-candidate> colonies grown on STO feeder cells. B) Growth curve of wild-type (WT), ESG1-null (-/-) and heterozygous (+/-) ES cells. Each clone (1 × 104 cells/well) was plated in 24-well plates. Cell numbers were determined with a Coulter counter at 2, 4, and 6 days. Data of +/- and -/- cells are shown as averages and standard deviations of three independent clones. C) A section of teratoma derived from ESG1-null ES cells (hematoxylin & eosin staining).
16504174	Analyses of ESG1-null ES cells. A) The morphology of ESG1-null ES cell colonies grown on STO feeder cells. B) Growth curve of wild-type (WT), ESG1-null (-/-) and heterozygous (+/-) ES cells. Each clone (1 × 104 cells/well) was plated in 24-well plates. <andsystem-candidate> numbers were determined with a Coulter counter at 2, 4, and 6 days. Data of +/- and -/- cells are shown as averages and standard deviations of three independent clones. C) A section of teratoma derived from ESG1-null ES cells (hematoxylin & eosin staining).
16504174	We examined the gene expression profiles of ESG1-/- ES cells using oligonucleotide-based DNA microarrays representing ~20,000 genes. In comparison to control ES cells, ESG1 was identified as the gene reduced to the greatest extent in ESG1-/- ES cells (Figure 6A). The expression of ES <andsystem-candidate> marker genes, such as Nanog and Oct3/4, was normal in ESG1-/- ES cells. We confirmed normal Oct3/4 expression at protein levels by Western blot (Figure 6B). The overall gene expression profiles were similar between control ES cells and ESG1-/- ES cells. Several genes exhibited a greater than two-fold reduction in ESG1-/- cells, including Krt1-8, Pem, Ctgf, Ptgs2, Igf2 and Inhba. These genes might be regulated directly or indirectly by ESG1. Since ESG1 contains a KH-type RNA-binding domain, it may stabilize mRNA of these genes. Further studied are required to clarify this possibility.
16504174	Gene expression analyses of ESG1-null ES cells. A) DNA microarray analyses. Total RNA from wild-type ES cells and ESG1-null ES cells were labeled with Cy3 and Cy5, respectively. Samples were hybridized to Agilent Mouse Developmental Microarrays. The averages of two independent clones are shown. B) Western blot analyses. <andsystem-candidate> lysates from ESG1+/- and ESG1-/- cells were examined for expression of ESG1, Oct3/4 and CDK4 with immunoblotting.
16504174	To generate ESG1-knockout mice, we injected β-geo-ESG1+/- ES <andsystem-candidate> clones into the blastocysts of C57BL6 mice. We obtained germline transmission from three clones. We obtained ESG1-/- mice at the Mendelian ratios (36 wild-type, 69 ESG1+/-, and 45 ESG1-/-) from intercrosses of ESG1+/- mice. These animals exhibited normal development, gross appearance, and fertility (not shown). Histological examination of testis and ovary could not identify any abnormalities (not shown). These data demonstrated that ESG1 is dispensable for both mouse development and germ cell formation.
16504174	We also generated ES cells from blastocysts obtained by intercrosses of ESG1+/- males and ESG1-/- females. Of the eight ES <andsystem-candidate> lines established, two clones were ESG1-/-. These ESG1-null ES cells demonstrated normal morphology, proliferation, and differentiation (not shown), confirming that ESG1 is dispensable in ES cells.
16504174	To analyze the physiological roles of ESG1, we identified the mouse gene on chromosome 9 and deleted it by homologous recombination in ES cells. Despite specific expression in early embryos, germ cells, and pluripotent cells, our data demonstrated that ESG1 is dispensable for mouse development, germ <andsystem-candidate> formation, and ES cell self-renewal.
16504174	ES cells genomic DNA was extracted with PUREGENE™ <andsystem-candidate> Lysis Solution (Gentra systems). For 5' Southern blot analysis, genomic DNA was first digested with PstI, then separated on an 0.8% agarose gel and transferred to a nylon membrane as described [20]. A 560 bp 5' probe was amplified using the ESG1S5 (5'- GATGGTGGTGGTGACTCAGAG -3') and ESG1AS5 as (5'- CCTCCATTGCCTCTATATCAG -3') primers. The probe specifically labeled an 18 kbp band from the wild-type locus, a 15 kbp band from the β-geo locus, and a 12 kbp band from the HygR locus. Genomic DNA was also digested with SpeI for 3' Southern blot analysis. A 1,010 bp 3' probe was amplified with the pH34U-8000 (5'- CCAACCAGCCAGAGTTTCAGTTAT -3') and pH34L-9000 (5'-GATAAGCTGCTGCCAAAAGACAAG -3') primers. The probe hybridized to an 11.5 kbp band from the wild-type locus, a 12.5 kbp band from the β-geo locus, and a 9.5 kbp band from the HygR locus.
16504174	After preparation of ES <andsystem-candidate> extracts with M-Per (Pierce), cellular proteins were separated on sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-14% polyacrylamide gels and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Millipore). Membranes were incubated with anti-ESG1 (1/500 dilution), anti-Oct3/4 (1/500; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-CDK4 (1/200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and anti-GFP (1/1000; MBL) primary antibodies. Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit and anti-mouse immunoglobulins (1/5000; Cell Signaling) were used to detect antibody binding. We visualized bound antibody with an ECL Western Blotting Detection System (Amersham).
16504174	After preparation of ES cell extracts with M-Per (Pierce), cellular proteins were separated on sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-14% polyacrylamide gels and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Millipore). Membranes were incubated with anti-ESG1 (1/500 dilution), anti-Oct3/4 (1/500; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-CDK4 (1/200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and anti-GFP (1/1000; MBL) primary antibodies. Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit and anti-mouse immunoglobulins (1/5000; <andsystem-candidate> Signaling) were used to detect antibody binding. We visualized bound antibody with an ECL Western Blotting Detection System (Amersham).
16504174	Esg1+/-or ESG1-/- mutant female mice were injected with Tamoxifen (10 μg) and Depo-provera (1 mg) subcutaneously on the third day of pregnancy. Four days later, embryos in diapause were flushed out of the uterus and cultured on STO feeder cells in four-well plates in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 20% Fetal Bovine Serum (Hyclone), 0.1 mM Non-Essential Amino Acids (Invitrogen), 2 mM L-glutamine (Invitrogen), 50 U/ml Penicillin-Streptomysin (Invitrogen), and 0.11 mM 2-mercaptoethanol (Invitrogen). After six days, the central mass of each explant was harvested, rinsed in PBS, and placed in a drop of trypsin for a few minutes. The <andsystem-candidate> mass was collected with a finely drawn-out Pasteur pipette preloaded with medium, ensuring minimal carryover of the trypsin. The cells were gently transfered into a fresh well with 20% FBS-containing medium. The resulting primary ES cell colonies were individually passaged into wells of four-well plates containing STO feeder cell layers. Thereafter, cells were expanded by trypsinization of the entire culture.
16504174	HA carried out the phenotypic studies of ESG1 knockout mice. KI determined the chromosomal localizations of the ESG1 gene and pseudogenes and constructed the targeting vector. TI carried out mouse embryo manipulation. MM and MN carried out ES <andsystem-candidate> culture. SY conceived of the study, and participated in its design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
12585968	Brn3c is a POU domain factor that is crucial for inner ear hair <andsystem-candidate> development. Targeted null Brn3c mutants have no mature hair cells [1,2]. Close examination has revealed that some 'immature' hair cells form in Brn3c null mutants and express cellular markers such as Myosin VI and VIIa, calretinin and parvalbumin [3]. Furthermore, these immature hair cells of Brn3c null mutants undergo apoptosis in neonates [3]. Consistent with an apparent absence of mature hair cells, initial work suggested that all vestibular and most spiral ganglion cells are lost by postnatal day 14 (P14; [1]). However, more detailed quantification by others [3] reported that at P4 about 77% of vestibular neurons and only 29% of spiral neurons are lost. It was suggested that there is possibly a complete loss in adults [3]. Other than these preliminary statements, no data exists concerning the detailed pattern of loss of innervation in Brn3c null mutants.
12585968	We report here long term retention of cochlear sensory neurons for at least 6 months, in particular in the cochlear apex, in Brn3c null mutant mice. This retention of afferents and efferents is unrelated to hair <andsystem-candidate> differentiation as not even immature hair cells can be detected at early postnatal stages with MyoVII immunocytochemistry in this part of the cochlea. This retention of apical spiral neurons is also largely unrelated to neurotrophins which are known to be reduced in their expression in neonatal rodents [4].
12585968	Size variations of vestibular ganglia in control and mutant littermates labeled with DiI. In newborn animals, the vestibular ganglion shows a dramatic reduction in Brn3c null mutants (b) compared to control littermates (a). Abbreviations for this and other figures: AC, anterior crista; ggl, ganglion; c, spiral capillary; Genic. ggl., geniculate ganglion; GER, greater epithelial ridge; HC, horizontal crista; HaC, vestibular hair <andsystem-candidate>; IHC, inner hair cell; iHC, immature hair cell; IGSB, intraganglionic spiral bundle; OHC, outer hair cell; PC, posterior crista; S, saccule; SG, spiral ganglion; TM, tectorial membrane; U, utricle; VCN, ventral cochlear nucleus; VG, vestibular ganglion. Bar indicates 1000 μm.
12585968	However, there is one qualitative difference not recognized in any single neurotrophin null mutant. Afferents reach all three rows of outer hair cells in the basal turn of control wildtype littermates (Fig. 2c), but both afferent and efferent outgrowth is disorganized to outer hair cells in Brn3c null mutants (Fig. 2d) and does not show any clear organization into three distinct longitudinal fiber bundles paralleling the three rows in the outer hair <andsystem-candidate> region. These data suggest that fiber organization in the outer hair cell region is partly disrupted in Brn3c null mutant.
12585968	The cochlea at P8 shows more qualitative deviations from the normal pattern of innervation. For example, all three rows of outer hair cells now receive both afferent and efferent innervation in the base of control littermates (Fig. 3c). However, no fibers extend to the outer hair <andsystem-candidate> region in Brn3c null mutants (Figs. 3d,3e,3f). In control animals there is dense innervation of inner hair cells, whereas Brn3c null mutants show a curious aggregation of fibers near focal spots around the habenula perforata. The apex shows less pronounced deviations from normal (Fig. 3f,3g). However, as in the base, afferents and efferents extend sparingly to the outer hair cell region. There is formation of an inner spiral bundle communicating both afferents and efferents between the focal points where fibers appear to pass through the habenula perforata (Fig. 3f,3g). As in newborn animals, efferent fibers closely follow the pattern of innervation displayed by afferents (data not shown).
12585968	The limited qualitative effect of Brn3c null mutations on fiber loss is particularly obvious in the P8 Brn3c null mutant apical turn (Fig. 3g). Immunocytochemical and histochemcial data show the presence of only a few immature hair cells in the cochlea (Fig. 4), which amounted to about 1% (Table 1). Not a single immature hair <andsystem-candidate> forms in the apex of the cochlea. In contrast, more immature hair cells are found in the appropriate position of hair cells in the vestibular endorgans (Table 1). In fact, the vestibular end organs show no overt morphological defect other than the reduced presence of these immature hair cells. Nerve fibers can be traced into the sensory epithelium of P0 and P8 Brn3c null mutants past the habenula perforata and there is a normal location of spiral sensory neurons in Rosenthal's canal in the apex of P8 Brn3c null mutants (Fig. 3d,3g). The cochlea shows other defects as well. For example, the spiral capillary is not found underneath the organ of Corti but in the spiral limbus nearby (Fig. 4). The lack of immature hair cells seems to affect also the formation of pillar cells (undifferentiated almost throughout the cochlea; Fig. 4) and Deiters' cells (not recognizable based on their morphology), a suggestion consistent with recent molecular data on the interaction of hair cells and supporting cells [17,18].
12585968	The distribution of hair cells as identified with MyoVII immunocytochemistry is shown for 7-day old whole mounted cochlea (a-d) and the appearance of cytological differentiation is shown as revealed with epoxy resin sections in 7-day old (e-g) and 6-month old (h) control (a,c,e) and Brn3c mutant cochleae (b,d,f-h). Note the uniform staining with this antibody of all three rows of outer hair cells (OHC) and the single row of inner hair cells (IHC) in the wildtype (a,c). In contrast, only few immature hair cells (iHC) are found in the basal turn of the mutant littermate (b) and only an occasional <andsystem-candidate> is MyoVII immunopositive in the middle turn (d). No MyoVII positive immature hair cells exist in the apex. Sections show the degree of differentiation of hair cells and their innervating fibers stained with tubulin immunocytochemistry (arrow; e-h). Note the presence of a spiral capillary (C) under the tunnel of Corti separating the inner and outer hair cells in the P7 wildtype (e). In contrast, no such capillary is present underneath the organ of Corti in mutants (f-h) and no tunnel of Corti is found either. A tectorial membrane forms (TM) but otherwise there is little cyotological differentiation. Note that tubulin-positive fibers can be traced to the immature cells until 6 months (h). Bar in c indicates 100 μm.
12585968	The central projection of DiI and DiA traces fibers to the cochlear nuclei (Fig. 6) where they show a clear segregation of apical turn afferents (Fig. 6, green) and basal turn afferents (Fig. 6, red) in both the entering cochlear nerve (Fig. 6a) and the ventral cochlear nucleus (VCN) (Fig. 6b). Qualitative comparable central projections are found in wildtype control littermates (data not shown) and suggest that the central projection to cochlear nuclei is at least until P8 in mice not critically dependent on auditory information or other hair <andsystem-candidate>-mediated influences, in agreement with recent suggestions [5,19].
12585968	The expression of BDNF and NT-3 mRNA is shown in the P0 vestibular sensory epithelia. Silver grains are false colored as red to enhance visibility against the grey Nissl-stained background. Canal cristae contain only BDNF (a,b), but gravistatic endorgans, such as saccule and utricle, contain both BDNF and NT-3 (c-f). Note the prominent BDNF expression in the hair <andsystem-candidate> region (HaC) of control canal (b) and saccule (d) and low levels of expression in the Brn3c null mice (a,c) over immature hair cells (iHC). The NT-3 expression is much more diffuse in both control and Brn3c mutant littermates. Bar indicates 100 μm.
12585968	In the saccule, we directly compared the BDNF (Fig. 8c,8d) and NT-3 signal (Fig. 8e,8f) of the Brn3c null mutant (Fig. 8c,8e) and control littermates (Fig. 8d,8f). A strong BDNF signal was found over the hair cells of control animals and an occasional immature hair <andsystem-candidate> also showed a BDNF signal in the Brn3c null mutants. The NT-3 signal was more diffuse in both the control and the Brn3c null littermates but showed some slightly above background signal in the area of the sensory epithelium even in the Brn3c null mutant.
12585968	The neurotrophins have long been implicated as the mediators for target mediated <andsystem-candidate> death. In essence, this theory of regulation of neuronal connections via neurotrophic support implies that only limited quantities of neurotrophins are released by the target tissue to support only properly connected sensory neurons by providing only these with a critical amount of neurotrophins [21]. Past experiments, which eliminated one or more neurotrophins entirely, only partially tested the basic assumption of this theory in vivo. For example, in BDNF heterozygotic animals there is a small decrease in the number of sensory neurons in the ear [13] but no change in the overall pattern of innervation. Moreover, all of the neurotrophin/neurotrophin receptor null mutants studied to date eliminate expression in both the peripheral target and the brain simultaneously and achieve their effects in late embryos. In contrast, Brn3c is barely expressed during embryogenesis in the CNS [22] thus arguing that the survival of ear primary neurons depends crucially on the periphery.
12585968	Formation of radial fibers that bring peripheral processes of spiral neurons to the organ of Corti seems to be rather normal, even in the apex of the cochlea which does not even develop immature hair cells recognizable by Myo VIIa. This does not preclude that even less differentiated hair <andsystem-candidate> precursors may form in the apex or that those precursors have died before birth. Interestingly, the growth to outer hair cells is most affected in Brn3c null mutant cochleae. Instead of extending radially through the tunnel of Corti to outer hair cells, afferents appear to stall and extend in longitudinal directions as inner spiral bundles (Figs. 3, 7). It has been shown that the differentiation of pillar cells depends on activation of Fgfr3 [26] by FGF's, probably Fgf8, a factor produced by developing and mature inner hair cells [18,27]. The formation of supporting cells also appears to depend on the proper expression of various bHLH factors such as Hes 1 and 5 which appear to be regulated by the Notch signaling pathway [17,28,29]. It is possible that the apparent inability of fibers to extend along outer hair cells is related to the lack of differentiation of supporting cells in the absence of mature hair cells. Probing for the proper expression of supporting cell specific markers in Brn3c null mutants is necessary to further evaluate these suggestions.
12585968	The long term retention of afferents in the cochlear apex in the absence of any apparent differentiation of hair cells raises hopes for cochlear implants in deaf-born children. Similar long term retention of apical afferents exists in the deaf white cat [25] and should be explored in other model systems with embryonic and neonatal hair <andsystem-candidate> loss [37,38].
12585968	Immunostaining of P7 cochlear whole mounts using the hair <andsystem-candidate> specific-myosin VII (MyoVIIa) antibody was performed as previously described [2]. Images of labeled organs of Corti were then acquired using a SPOT digital camera (Diagnostic Instruments Inc.) and the number of hair cells was scored from acquired images. To determine the number of hair cells or neurons in vestibular endorgans or sensory ganglia, serial sections were stained with Cresyl Violet and images were similarly acquired and scored. Every other section was scored for each sensory epithelium and every forth section was scored for each ganglion. Only neurons or cells with a clear nucleus and nucleoli were counted and 4–6 samples were counted for each epithelium and ganglion. All data were tested for significance using two-sample Student's t-test with unequal variances.
15836427	Neuronal differentiation is a protracted process during which newly generated neurons express distinct cellular and molecular programs at precise times during their maturation: long-distance <andsystem-candidate> outgrowth, subsequent terminal branching, and finally synaptogenesis. Many important aspects of neuronal character appear to be acquired through the expression of transcription factors at progenitor cell stages, whereas others depend on expression immediately upon cell cycle exit [1]. But whether the orderly expression and activity of transcriptional programs at much later developmental stages, well after cell cycle exit, is an essential step in the progression of neuronal differentiation and circuit assembly has yet to be resolved.
15836427	Neuronal differentiation is a protracted process during which newly generated neurons express distinct cellular and molecular programs at precise times during their maturation: long-distance axon outgrowth, subsequent terminal branching, and finally synaptogenesis. Many important aspects of neuronal character appear to be acquired through the expression of transcription factors at progenitor <andsystem-candidate> stages, whereas others depend on expression immediately upon cell cycle exit [1]. But whether the orderly expression and activity of transcriptional programs at much later developmental stages, well after cell cycle exit, is an essential step in the progression of neuronal differentiation and circuit assembly has yet to be resolved.
15836427	The onset of some transcriptional programs in neurons, however, has also been shown to occur long after neurons exit the <andsystem-candidate> cycle. An emerging principle from work in Drosophila and vertebrates is that target-derived factors play a crucial role in the induction of these transcriptional programs [10]. In Drosophila, retrograde BMP signals from the target region control the terminal differentiation of a subpopulation of peptidergic neurons expressing Apterous and Squeeze [11,12]. In vertebrates, peripheral neurotrophic signals have been shown to direct the onset of expression of the ETS transcription factors Er81 and Pea3 in DRG sensory neurons and motor neuron pools several days after these neurons have become post-mitotic [9,13,14,15,16]. Moreover, the induction of Er81 expression in proprioceptive afferents is known to be mediated by peripheral neurotrophin 3 (NT-3) [9]. These two ETS proteins control late aspects of spinal monosynaptic circuit assembly, with Er81 directing proprioceptive sensory neuron differentiation and Pea3 directing motor neuron pool differentiation, respectively [14,15]. In particular, in the absence of Er81, achieved by mutation in the gene or by deprivation of peripheral neurotrophin signaling, group Ia proprioceptive afferents fail to invade the ventral spinal cord and to make effective synaptic connections with motor neurons [9,14].
15836427	We first defined an ETS transcription regulator that is able to replace the function of Er81 within proprioceptive afferents to direct projections into the ventral spinal cord. Er81, Pea3, and Erm constitute the Pea3 subfamily of ETS transcription factors, show a high degree of amino acid identity, and bind to very similar DNA target sequences [17,18,19]. Nevertheless, when introduced into the Er81 locus in analogy to a previously used targeting strategy (data not shown; [14]), neither Pea3 nor Erm could rescue Ia proprioceptive afferent projections to extensively invade the ventral horn of the spinal cord (data not shown). These findings prompted us to analyze mice in which we integrated EWS-Pea3, a break-point fusion product between the amino-terminal domain of the Ewing sarcoma (EWS) gene and the Pea3 DNA binding domain [20,21], into the Er81 locus (Figure 1). We found that in a luciferase-enzyme-based <andsystem-candidate> culture transfection assay, EWS-Pea3 showed stronger transactivation activity than Er81 or Pea3 (Figure 1J; data not shown), in agreement with previous studies [22,23,24]. Moreover, transactivation by EWS-Pea3 was abolished by mutation of ETS-binding sites in the reporter plasmid, demonstrating ETS-binding-site dependence (data not shown).
15836427	Expression of Er81 in DRG neurons of embryos containing integration of EWS-Pea3 in the Er81 locus (Er81EWS-Pea3/−) was abolished (Figure 1E), and the expression level of the calcium-binding protein Parvalbumin (PV) in proprioceptive afferents, which is decreased approximately 5- to 10-fold in Er81 mutants [14], was comparable to wild-type levels in Er81EWS-Pea3/− embryos (Figure 1F–1H). To further define DRG neuron differentiation in the presence of EWS-Pea3 in proprioceptive afferents in vivo, we assessed whether replacement of Er81 by EWS-Pea3 had an influence on neuronal survival or on the expression of proprioceptive-afferent-specific genes. Er81EWS-Pea3/− mice did not differ from wild-type in the number of proprioceptive afferent <andsystem-candidate> bodies within the DRG of L1 to L5, the expression of several genes normally expressed by proprioceptive afferents, and the lack of expression of genes not normally expressed in proprioceptive afferents (Figure S1; data not shown). Together, these findings suggest that the expression of EWS-Pea3 from the normal time of onset mimics the function of Er81 as assessed by induction and maintenance of gene expression within proprioceptive afferents.
15836427	To determine the extent of rescue of Ia proprioceptive afferent projections into the ventral spinal cord of Er81 mutant mice achieved by expression of EWS-Pea3, we traced intraspinal afferent projections by axonal labeling of PV (Figure 2A–2C). In addition, to analyze <andsystem-candidate> ingrowth independent of the level of PV expression in DRG neurons, we used anterograde labeling of afferent fibers by applying fluorescently labeled dextran to cut dorsal roots (Figure 2D–2F). Using both assays, we found extensive rescue of the projections into the ventral horn of the spinal cord in Er81EWS-Pea3/− mice (Figure 2C and 2F). Within the ventral horn, Ia afferents in both wild-type and Er81EWS-Pea3/− mice formed vGlut1+ terminals that were absent in Er81 mutant mice (Figure 2G–2I). To assess whether synapses between Ia afferents and motor neurons are functional in Er81EWS-Pea3/− mice, we performed intracellular recordings from identified quadriceps motor neurons after stimulation of nerves innervating the quadriceps muscle group. We found no significant difference in the input amplitude to quadriceps motor neurons when comparing wild-type to Er81EWS-Pea3/− mice (Figure S2; wild-type, 10.6 ± 0.9 mV, n = 11; Er81EWS-Pea3/−, 10.9 ± 1 mV, n = 8). Together, these findings suggest that in the absence of Er81, EWS-Pea3 can direct the complex biological process of correct laminar termination within the ventral spinal cord and the formation of synapses with motor neurons (Figure 2J–2L), thus identifying an ETS transcription factor suitable for heterochronic expression experiments in DRG neurons.
15836427	We next examined the establishment of peripheral projections upon precocious EWS-Pea3 expression in DRG neurons. While sensory axons in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos reached the skin and established major nerve trunks by E16.5, only rudimentary sensory <andsystem-candidate> branching was established within the skin (Figure 3D and 3J). In addition, there was a significant reduction in the number of muscle spindles in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos (approximately 25% of wild-type complement; n = 3) as assessed by innervation and expression of genes specific for intrafusal muscle fibers such as Egr3 (Figure 3E, 3F, 3K, and 3L; [26]). In summary, whereas isochronic expression of EWS-Pea3 promoted the establishment of proprioceptive afferent projections into the ventral spinal cord, precocious expression of the same ETS signaling factor in DRG neurons interfered with establishment of projections into the spinal cord as well as to peripheral targets.
15836427	We next assayed whether the complete absence of Trk receptor expression in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos had an influence on naturally occurring <andsystem-candidate> death in vivo using TUNEL on DRG sections. Surprisingly, we found that apoptosis was decreased by approximately 50% (n = 3 embryos, average of >50 sections) in DRG of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos in comparison to wild-type (Figure 6D, 6J, and 6M). Quantitative analysis of the number of neurons in lumbar DRG of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos revealed a significant increase to approximately 170% of wild-type levels (Figure 6E, 6K, and 6N). Moreover, BrdU pulse-chase experiments ruled out the possibility that DRG neurons in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos reenter the cell cycle (no BrdU+/LacZ+ cells, n = 3 embryos, analysis of >50 sections each; Figure 6F and 6L). Together with the in vitro culture experiments, these findings suggest that DRG neurons from TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos remain post-mitotic but fail to become sensitive to naturally occurring cell death, and survive in the absence of Trk receptors and neurotrophic support.
15836427	We next analyzed whether changes in the expression of proteins known to be involved in the regulation of neuronal survival or <andsystem-candidate> death could be detected in DRG of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos. We found no significant quantitative changes in the level of Akt/p-Akt or CREB/p-CREB in DRG (Figure 6O and 6P) both of which have been shown to be key regulators of neuronal survival [29]. Moreover, the level of the proapoptotic Bcl2 family member Bax was not significantly reduced (Figure 6O and 6P). In contrast, the expression level of the anti-apoptotic Bcl2 family members Bcl-xl and Bcl2 was significantly increased when compared to wild-type levels (Bcl2, 157%; Bcl-xl, 259%; average of n = 3 independent experiments; Figure 6O and 6P), providing a potential molecular explanation for the enhanced neuronal survival of DRG neurons of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos in the absence of Trk receptor expression [30].
15836427	We first analyzed expression of TrkC, a gene downregulated in DRG neurons of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos (Figure 7A and 7B). The level of expression of TrkC was indistinguishable from wild-type in DRG neurons of Er81EWS-Pea3/− and TauEWS-Pea3/+ PVCre/+ embryos (Figure 7A, 7C, and 7D). Moreover, PV was not expressed in DRG neurons of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos (Figure S5) but was expressed by proprioceptive afferents in both wild-type and Er81EWS-Pea3/− embryos (see Figures 1 and S5) [14]. We also found several genes that were ectopically upregulated in DRG neurons of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos (Figure 7). Calretinin and Calbindin, two different calcium-binding proteins expressed by subpopulations of DRG neurons in wild-type, Er81EWS-Pea3/−, and TauEWS-Pea3/+ PVCre/+ embryos (Figure 7E, 7G, and 7H; data not shown) [31,32], were induced in more than 95% of all DRG neurons of TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos (Figures 7F and S5). These findings suggest that DRG neurons in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ embryos fail to differentiate to a normal fate and instead acquire an aberrant identity distinct from any subpopulation of wild-type DRG neurons. Finally, to assess whether EWS-Pea3 expressed precociously acts exclusively <andsystem-candidate>-autonomously or whether it may also influence neighboring DRG neurons, we activated expression of EWS-Pea3 using Hb9Cre mice [33]. Due to a transient and rostro-caudally graded expression of Hb9 at neural plate stages, very few DRG neurons at brachial levels and increasingly more neurons progressing caudally undergo recombination in TauEWS-Pea3/+ Hb9Cre/+ and TaumGFP/+ Hb9Cre/+ embryos (Figure 8). Nevertheless, downregulation of Trk receptor expression or upregulation of Calretinin is restricted exclusively to neurons that have undergone recombination and cannot be observed in TaumGFP/+ Hb9Cre/+ embryos (Figure 8). Together, these results and the findings obtained from in vitro culture experiments (see Figures 4 and 5) demonstrate that precocious or isochronic expression of EWS-Pea3 in the same neurons leads to significantly different cell-autonomous cellular responses with respect to gene expression, neuronal survival, and neurite outgrowth (Figure 9).
15836427	Er81EWS-Pea3 mice were generated following a strategy similar to that described for the generation of Er81NLZ mice [14]. In brief, a targeting vector with a cDNA coding for EWS-Pea3 was inserted in frame with the endogenous start ATG into exon 2 of the Er81 genomic locus and used for homologous recombination in W95 ES cells. EWS-Pea3 represents a fusion gene between the amino terminal of EWS and the ETS domain of Pea3 [20]. The primer pair used to specifically detect the Er81EWS-Pea3 allele was 5′-CAGCCACTGCACCTACAAGAC-3′ and 5′-CTTCCTGCTTGATGTCTCCTTC-3′. For the generation of TaumGFP and TauEWS-Pea3 mice, lox-STOP-lox-mGFP-IRES-NLS-LacZ-pA and lox-STOP-lox-EWS-Pea3-IRES-NLS-LacZ-pA targeting cassettes were integrated into exon 2 of the Tau genomic locus (the endogenous start ATG was removed in the targeting vectors; details available upon request). mGFP was provided by P. Caroni [25]. ES <andsystem-candidate> recombinants were screened by Southern blot analysis using the probe in the 5′ region as described previously [41]. Frequency of recombination in 129/Ola ES cells was approximately 1/3 for both Tau constructs. For the generation of PVCre mice, mouse genomic clones were obtained by screening a 129SV/J genomic library (Incyte, Wilmington, Delaware, United States). For details on the genomic structure of the mouse PV locus see [42]. An IRES-Cre-pA targeting cassette [33] was integrated into the 3′ UTR of exon 5, and ES cell recombinants were screened with a 5′ probe (oligos, 5′-GAGATGACCCAGCCAGGATGCCTC-3′ and 5′-CTGACCACTCTCGCTCCGGTGTCC-3′; genomic DNA, HindIII digest). The frequency of recombination in 129/Ola ES cells was approximately 1/20. Recombinant clones were aggregated with morula stage embryos to generate chimeric founder mice that transmitted the mutant alleles. In all experiments performed in this study, animals were of mixed genetic background (129/Ola and C57Bl6). Thy1spGFP transgenic mice were generated in analogy to De Paola et al. [25], and for these experiments a strain of mice with early embryonic expression was selected. Isl1Cre and Hb9Cre mouse strains have been described [33,43] and Bax+/− animals were from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine, United States) [27]. Timed pregnancies were set up to generate embryos of different developmental stages with all genotypes described throughout the study.
15836427	Lumbar DRG from E16.5 embryos were isolated, mechanically disrupted, homogenized using glass beads (Sigma), and lysed in standard lysis buffer supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors as described [47]. Protein extracts were resolved by SDS-PAGE, and immunoblotting was performed using antibodies against Akt, p-Akt (Ser473), CREB, p-CREB (Ser133), Bax, Bcl-xl (<andsystem-candidate> Signaling Technology, Beverly, Massachusetts, United States), and Bcl2 (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, California, United States). For quantification, films (X-OMAT AR, Eastman Kodak, Rochester, New York, United States) were scanned and densitometry was performed using IMAGEQUANT 5.2 (Molecular Dynamics, Amersham, Uppsala, Sweden).
15836427	(D–F and J–L) Analysis of lumbar DRG of wild-type (D), TaumGFP/+ IslCre/+ (E and F), and TauEWS-Pea3/+ Isl1Cre/+ (J, K, and L) embryos for (1) neuronal <andsystem-candidate> death at E13.5 by TUNEL (green; D and J), (2) cell survival and proliferation at E16.5 by LacZ (blue) wholemount staining (E and K; lumbar levels L1 and L2 are shown), and (3) BrdU (green)/LacZ (red) double labeling (F and L).
15836427	(I) Summary diagram illustrating deregulation of TrkC (red arrows, downregulation) and Calretinin (green arrows, upregulation) expression upon precocious (B and F) induction of EWS-Pea3 expression in DRG neurons (B and F; E10–E11, i.e., shortly after <andsystem-candidate> cycle exit, E9.5–E10). In contrast, activation of EWS-Pea3 from the endogenous Er81 locus (C and G; E12.5–E13) or via Cre recombinase expression from the PV locus activating late expression from the Tau locus (D and H; E14.5) does not interfere with the normal expression of TrkC and Calretinin (shown in grey).
17002498	The tumor suppressor gene Apc (adenomatous polyposis coli) is a member of the Wnt signaling pathway that is involved in development and tumorigenesis. Heterozygous knockout mice for Apc have a tumor predisposition phenotype and homozygosity leads to embryonic lethality. To understand the role of Apc in development we generated a floxed allele. These mice were mated with a strain carrying Cre recombinase under the control of the human Keratin 14 (K14) promoter, which is active in basal cells of epidermis and other stratified epithelia. Mice homozygous for the floxed allele that also carry the K14-cre transgene were viable but had stunted growth and died before weaning. Histological and immunochemical examinations revealed that K14-cre–mediated Apc loss resulted in aberrant growth in many ectodermally derived squamous epithelia, including hair follicles, teeth, and oral and corneal epithelia. In addition, squamous metaplasia was observed in various epithelial-derived tissues, including the thymus. The aberrant growth of hair follicles and other appendages as well as the thymic abnormalities in K14-cre; ApcCKO/CKO mice suggest the Apc gene is crucial in embryonic cells to specify epithelial <andsystem-candidate> fates in organs that require epithelial–mesenchymal interactions for their development.
17002498	Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) is a member of the Wnt signaling pathway and one of its known functions is to regulate the levels of β-catenin. Alterations in β-catenin regulation are very common in human tumors [1]. Loss of APC is associated with stabilization of the cytosolic β-catenin that ultimately results in its migration to the nucleus and activating a cascade of events leading to tumorigenesis. APC also interacts with a multitude of other cellular proteins, including axin-2 (AXIN2), plakoglobin (JUP), Asef (ARHGEF4), kinesin superfamily–associated protein 3 (KIFAP3), EB1 (MAPRE1), microtubules, and the human homolog of Drosophila discs large (DLG1). These interactions suggest that APC can potentially regulate many cellular functions, including intercellular adhesion, cytoskeletal organization, regulation of plakoglobin levels, regulation of the <andsystem-candidate> cycle and apoptosis, orientation of asymmetric stem cell division, and control of cell polarization [2,3].
17002498	Although the role of APC in the initiation of human colorectal cancer is well established, its role in other tissue and developmental processes are not well understood. Given the importance of regulation of Wnt signaling in embryonic pattern formation and morphogenesis of many organs, mechanistic understanding of APC in development and in extracolonic tissues becomes critical to better assess potential adverse events in humans. One approach to understand the role of Apc in development is to develop mice with an inactivating Apc mutation. Several genetically modified mouse strains for Apc have been described [7–10]. Most of these models, in the heterozygous state, show a gastrointestinal and other tumor predisposition phenotype [7–10]. Mouse embryos that are homozygous for the genetic modification die during embryogenesis, and some of the models do not survive beyond gastrulation [8,11]. An alternate approach to understand the role of Apc in development and/or in specific tissues is to generate a mouse strain that carries a conditionally modified allele and mate it with a mouse strain that facilitates the modification of the conditional allele in specific <andsystem-candidate> lineages.
17002498	To assess the role of Apc in different stages of life systematically, we generated mice containing a conditional knockout (CKO) mutant allele of Apc (ApcCKO). These mice were mated with a strain carrying Cre recombinase under the control of the human Keratin 14 (K14) promoter, which is active in basal cells of epidermis and other stratified epithelia. We report here that K14 promoter-driven loss of Apc resulted in aberrant development of several organs that require inductive epithelial–mesenchymal interactions, including hair follicle, teeth, and thymus, and resulted in neonatal death in mice. We found that Apc plays a crucial role in determinations of <andsystem-candidate> fates during the embryonic development, possibly via temporal and tissue-specific regulation of β-catenin levels in the skin, its appendages, and in the thymus.
17002498	To introduce the mutation of Apc into cells expressing K14, we crossed WW6 ES <andsystem-candidate>–derived [15] ApcCKO/+ mice with K14-cre recombinase mice in FVB background [16]. The K14-cre; ApcCKO/+ mice were normal in appearance and were fertile. K14-cre; ApcCKO/+ males were crossed to ApcCKO/CKO females to avoid the potential deleter effect in oocytes of K14-cre–positive females [17]. The mice were intercrossed thereafter for maintenance; hence, the mice used for analysis were in a mixed background of FVB, 129/S, and C57BL/6 in similar proportions, with minimal contribution of SJ.
17002498	The K14 promoter is a commonly used epidermal <andsystem-candidate> promoter because of its expression by the mitotically active cells of the epidermis and its appendages in mature skin [18], but most notably it is active in embryonic ectoderm as early as the single layered ectodermal stage of embryonic day (E) 9.5 [19]. A restricted expression of K14 is also found in thymic epithelial cells (TECs) in the medulla of normal thymus [20].
17002498	Current models of hair follicle development suggest that the establishment of a regular array of placodes in the surface epithelium in response to the first dermal message is achieved through the competing activities of molecules that promote or repress placode fate [24]. There is accumulating evidence that activation of the Wnt signaling pathway in the dermis may be involved in establishing the first dermal signal. Experimental activation of epithelial β-catenin signaling (by expression of N-terminal–truncated, constitutively stabilized forms of β-catenin or ectopic expression of Lef1) induces ectopic follicles in both mouse and chick skin [25–27]. Conversely, down-regulation of β-catenin signaling (through Lef1 knock-out, ectopic expression of Wnt inhibitor Dkk1 or conditional deletion of β-catenin in epidermis) results in loss of vibrissae and some pelage follicles in mice [28–30]. Our finding that K14-driven Apc loss in embryonic ectoderm resulted in irregularly spaced and often tightly clustered abnormal hair placode initiation and follicle morphogenesis (Figures 4F, 5B, 5D, and 5F) as well as in the development of multiple tooth buds (Figure 4O and 4P), is in line with the effects seen in activation of epithelial β-catenin signaling during placode formation, indicating the role of Apc in specification of embryonic ectodermal stem cells to produce a hair follicle. Given the role of Apc in down-regulation of β-catenin, loss of Apc would inevitably lead to altered expression of β-catenin in ectodermal cells during the hair placode formation, giving rise to aberrant follicular growth throughout the embryonic epidermis, including the footpads, where normally hairless (Figure 5B, 5D, 5F, and 5H). Of interest are the phenotypic similarities and differences between our KA mutant mice and the previously described K14-ΔN87βcat transgenic mice expressing stable β-catenin under the control of K14 promoter [25] and K14-Lef1 transgenic mice [27]. Surprisingly, our mutant mice shared more similarities with the K14-Lef1 mice than the K14-ΔN87βcat transgenic mice. For example, the KA mutant mice displayed the disoriented and short, curly whiskers seen in K14-Lef1but not in K14-ΔN87βcat transgenic mice. In addition, KA mutant mice displayed a disorganized hair coat beginning with the emergence of neonatal hairs, similar to that observed in K14-Lef1 mice, whereas in K14-ΔN87βcat mice, embryonic hair follicle morphogenesis was unaffected and other skin changes only emerged postnatally. The reason for this difference could be attributed to one or all of three possible contributing factors. (1) Although the K14 promoter itself is known to initiate the expression at E9.5 and elevated dramatically by E13.5–E14.5 [19,31], many factors could influence the expression of promoter/transgene construct in transgenic mice. One of the most important considerations has to do with the integration site of the transgene in the mouse genome. Depending on the location of integration, the transcriptional activity of even the same transgene could vary considerably. It is possible that the apparent lack of ΔN87βcat function in embryogenesis could be due to the delayed or weak expression of the K14-ΔN87βcat transgene compared to the intrinsic promoter. In contrast, Cre-mediated recombination is seen in E13.5 skin of K14-cre transgenic mice used in this study [16] and K14-cre–mediated truncation of the Apc gene is likely to have occurred by then, in time for the second wave of hair follicle morphgenesis. (2) Another important fact is that in the aforementioned transgenic model the overexpression of transgene is confined to the basal cells of the epidermis and the ORS of hair follicles, where the K14 promoter is active. The expression of transgene is hence transient and stops once K14-expressing cells terminally differentiate. In contrast, in our model, K14-cre–mediated deletion of Apc would result in Apc mutation not only in K14 promoter active cells, but remain so in all <andsystem-candidate> layers that derived from the K14 promoter active progenitors. These derivatives include the suprabasal epidermis and the entire epithelium of the hair follicle. Stabilization of β-catenin in a broader population of cells could account for some of the phenotypic differences. However, we did not detect any elevated β-catenin expression in either K1- or K6-positive differentiated cells in postnatal mutant skin. This indicates that despite the absence of Apc and potential stabilization of β-catenin in derivatives of K14-expressing progenitors, elevated β-catenin expression, and subsequent cell fate determination may only take place in basal cells. (3) We cannot exclude the possibility that given the multifunctional properties of Apc, disruption of its functions other than down-regulation of β-catenin may also have contributed to the observed overt phenotype.
17002498	In this study, we observed that K14-driven loss of Apc resulted in a small thymus with severe squamous metaplasia leading to the formation of numerous pyogranuloma and loss of proper meshwork structure for thymocyte maturation, rendering the mice athymic. Previous studies have shown that in normal adult thymus K14 expression is found together with K5 in the stellate medullary TECs, but not in association with K5+ TECs in the cortex or at the cortico-medullary junction. In addition, it has been demonstrated that K14+ TECs do not coexpress K8; hence, there are two distinct medullary subsets, namely a K8−K14+ stellate subset and a K8+K14− globular subset [32]. In agreement with the previous results, in P3 normal thymus K14 expression was restricted to stellate medullary TECs (Figure 6D), whereas K8 expression was found throughout the TECs (unpublished data). We could not clarify whether these two keratins were coexpressed in the same TECs without double-staining. There were individual differences among mutants and these were prominently reflected in the histological abnormalities of the thymus at P3, but as the older surviving mutants all showed the same histopathologies of the thymus, the mutant thymi eventually seem to result in the same fate. It is unclear when K14-cre induction actually takes place in the mutant thymus, but as the population of cells showing a strong nuclear β-catenin staining as well as the cells expressing K14 were small and thymic epithelial compartments still existed in a mild P3 mutant thymus (Figure 6E and 6F), it seems that initial differentiation to medullary and cortical TECs and thymocyte colonization have already taken place prior to the major effects of K14-driven Apc loss. However, cells with nuclear β-catenin and K8+K14+ double-positive epithelial cells increased subsequently, associated with active proliferation in the latter group of cells and loss of TEC compartments. With age, β-catenin expression pattern became more diffuse and fewer epithelial cells showed nuclear localization but K8+K14+ cells remained, forming concentric structures of epithelial cells filled with hard keratin deposits and infiltrated with vast number of neutrophils and macrophages. Only a few epithelial cells were dividing and hardly any thymocytes were present by this time. These results suggest that with the deletion of Apc in TECs, stabililization and nuclear localization of β-catenin took place and subsequently these cells differentiated into keratinocytes that expressed both K14 and K8, similar to the basal cells of the skin, instead of TEC subsets. The expansion and differentiation of these keratinocytes lead to loss of proper thymic epithelial compartments and in turn produced and deposited the hard keratins that consequently caused vast amount of neutrophils and macrophages to infiltrate the thymus. These aberrant epithelial structures eventually have overtaken the whole of the thymus and driven out the colonized thymocytes. K14-driven loss of Apc and subsequent constitutive expression of β-catenin in TECs have therefore misdirected them to wrong epithelial <andsystem-candidate> fate, not allowing proper differentiation to either cortical or medullary TECs, which is essential for normal thymocyte development. This is not only evident from the lack of dividing thymocytes in the mutant thymus by P13, but also by the differential expression pattern of keratins, which were more skin-like than TEC-like. The importance of Apc function in thymic development has been demonstrated by thymocyte-specific loss of Apc by crossing a different strain of Apc conditional mice and LckCre transgenic mice [33]. Here, by K14-driven TEC-specific loss of Apc, we have demonstrated its importance in thymus development not only in thymocytes but also in TECs.
17002498	In conclusion, we have shown that loss of Apc in K14-expressing embryonic cells causes aberrant morphogenesis in various skin appendages, including hair follicles and teeth, and abnormal thymus organogensis. Our results provide genetic evidence that expression of Apc is essential for regulation of proper <andsystem-candidate> fates in these organs that require epithelial–mesenchymal interactions.
17002498	The linearized targeting vectors were electroporated into 129/S-derived ES cells, WW6 cells [15]. All candidate G418-resistant ES clones were screened by long-range gene-specific PCR using Expand Long Template PCR System (Roche, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States), followed by sequencing to validate the correct insertion of the single loxP site and the selection cassette. Two ES clones with correct ApcCKON/+ modification were injected into C57BL/6J blastocysts, after which chimeric mice with high levels of ES <andsystem-candidate> contribution were backcrossed to C57BL/6J females to produce heterozygous F1 offspring. The genomic DNA samples obtained from the tail of F1 offspring were subsequently analyzed by Southern blot analysis to further confirm the correct homologous recombination. By crossing the heterozygous mice to FLPe deleter mice [34], PGKneor cassette was deleted in the germline by FRT-mediated recombination to generate mice with the final ApcCKO allele. ApcCKO heterozygous mice were crossed together to generate homozygous mice, and the homozygous offspring were interbred for maintenance.
16870721	Most RMCE experiments have been performed at random sites in somatic <andsystem-candidate> lines. Only a few mutant mice generated by RMCE in ES cells have been reported, but the RMCE systematically introduced a selectable marker (15–17), or, when tested without an incoming marker, proved inefficient (12). A recent report disclosed an additional problem: the Hygromycin–Thymidine Kinase fusion gene used most frequently for positive/negative selection in RMCE, leads to mouse sterility, so that exchanges can only be performed in ES cells (16).
16870721	Details for plasmid construction are available upon request owing to space limitations mandating a brief outline. We started from a plasmid L3-1L containing heterologous loxP sites (L3 is the mutant loxP257 recently described (14), 1L is an inverted WT loxP). The WT loxP and loxP257 differ in their spacer sequences: the spacer sequence is 5′-ATGTATGC-3′ for WT loxP and 5′-AAGTCTCC-3′ for loxP257. The three mutations in the loxP257 spacer sequence prevent it to recombine with WT loxP, ensuring efficient RMCE in several <andsystem-candidate> lines: accurate RMCE with these loxP sites occurred with an average frequency of 81% at two loci in CHO cells and an average frequency of 69% at four loci in Hela cells (14). The L3-1L plasmid was first modified to include a ClaI and a FseI site between the LoxP sites, leading to plasmid L3-CF-1L. We next modified a puroΔTK plasmid (YTC37, a kind gift from A. Bradley) by using oligonucleotides to destroy a NotI site downstream of the puroΔTK gene and introduce a NotI site upstream, and a FseI site downstream of the gene (leading to plasmid CN-PuroΔTK-F). Next, a PmlI-MfeI 6.3 kb fragment from Trp53 was subcloned in a modified pBluescript KSII+ (pBS, Stratagene), and the resulting plasmid was digested with SwaI to introduce an EagI site, leading to p53PmlEag, a plasmid containing exons 2–11 of p53. We then inserted a 5.5 kb ClaI-EagI fragment from p53PmlEag in plasmid CN-PuroΔTK-F digested by ClaI and NotI, and inserted the resulting fragment between the loxP sites of L3-CF-1L by ClaI and FseI digestion, leading to L3-p53PmlEagPuroΔTK-1L. We next engineered a plasmid containing the region for 3′-homology downstream of the p53 gene and the DTA gene in two steps: (i) we performed a three-way ligation between a modified pBS digested by HindIII and NotI, a HindIII-EcoRI fragment from Trp53 for 3′homology and an EcoRI-NotI fragment containing the DTA gene, from plasmid pgkdtabpa (kind gift of P. Soriano), leading to plasmid 3′ + DTA and (ii) because the Bsu36I-EcoRI region downstream of p53 contains repetitive sequences (F. Toledo and G. M. Wahl, unpublished data), we later deleted this region, to obtain plasmid 3′ + DTA. The 5′ homology consists of a 3.4 kb-long BamHI-PmlI fragment from intron 1 of p53 cloned in a modified pBS (plasmid p5′). Finally, appropriate fragments from plasmids p5′, L3-p53PmlEagPuroΔTK-1L, and 3′ + DTA were assembled in a modified pSP72 plasmid (Promega). Plasmid Flox, the resulting targeting construct, was verified by restriction analysis, then sequenced using 30 primers chosen to precisely verify all p53 coding sequences, all exon–intron junctions and the sequences at and around the loxP sites.
16870721	The rationale for RMCE-ASAP is detailed in Figure 1. The first step requires generating a floxed allele in ES cells that will serve as the substrate for subsequent exchanges (RMCE-ready ES <andsystem-candidate>, Figure 1). The targeting strategy is detailed in Figure 2. The frequency of targeting was 4% (12/300 puromycin-resistant clones, analyzed by Southern blot and long-range PCR, Figure 2).
16870721	We next tested the efficiency of RMCE in ES cells, using a replacement construct encoding p53 fused to GFP (p53GFP) to enable tracking p53 in individual live cells. Importantly however, GFP fluorescence was not used to screen cells with targeted events, as we wanted to develop a general method to isolate marker-free recombinants. The exchange strategy is detailed in Figure 3A. We picked 65 ES <andsystem-candidate> clones resistant to 1-(-2-deoxy-2-fluoro-1-b-d-arabino-furanosyl)-5-iodouracil (FIAU) due to TK loss and analyzed their DNA by PCR and Southern blot. Strikingly, 54 proper recombinants were identified, indicating very high RMCE efficiency (83%). RMCE also proved to be precise, as no aberrant bands were detected in PCR and Southern blots (Figure 3A). p53+/GFP ES clones were analyzed by western blot with an antibody against p53, and found to express an additional band at the expected size (ca. 80 kDa). Surprisingly, the fusion of GFP to p53 apparently altered p53 stability: steady-state levels of p53GFP were much higher than those of wild-type p53 (p53WT) in unstressed cells, and did not vary significantly after DNA damage, so that the levels for both p53WT and p53GFP were similar after adriamycin treatment (Figure 3A).
16870721	To test this possibility, we performed RMCE with a p53 fusion gene in which the p53 proline-rich domain (PRD) was deleted (p53ΔP), and the p53ΔP was fused to GFP. We used this mutant because deleting the proline-rich domain decreases stability and compromises DNA-damage responses in vivo (5). According to our hypothesis, this hypomorphic mutant should not prevent embryonic development. RMCE with a p53ΔPGFP replacement plasmid was again very efficient and western blots revealed an additional band of the predicted molecular weight only in p53+/ΔPGFP ES cells (Figure 3B). As expected, the PRD deletion correlated with lower expression levels: p53ΔPGFP was much less abundant than p53WT in all p53+/ΔPGFP clones (Figure 3B). We next determined whether p53+/ΔPGFP ES cells could generate chimeric mice and transmit the modified allele through the germline. Two p53+/ΔPGFP ES <andsystem-candidate> clones were injected into blastocysts and highly chimeric (>80%) mice were obtained. Heterozygote pups were recovered from the mating the chimeras with WT mice (Figure 3C). These data demonstrate that marker-free RMCE is very efficient in ES cells and allows germline transmission of a targeted mutation (see Figure 1, path A).
16870721	We also performed RMCE in p53RMCE/− MEFs with the p53ΔPGFP construct. p53ΔPGFP-expressing MEFs were viable, recovered with an efficiency of ∼40%, and, as expected from ES <andsystem-candidate> experiments, expressed a p53ΔPGFP protein at much lower levels than p53WT (Figure 5B). Unlike WT MEFs, p53ΔP/ΔP MEFs are unable to arrest cycling after irradiation (5). Likewise, we found that irradiation doses that arrested p53RMCE/− MEFs (which express a wild-type p53 from the RMCE-ready locus, see Figure 2) did not arrest p53ΔPGFP/− MEFs (Figure 5C). These data show that a single RMCE-ASAP reaction in heterozygous MEFs enables detection of a recessive phenotype. The results confirm that deleting the proline rich domain leads to less active p53 with impaired cell cycle control, and also indicate that a GFP C-terminal fusion can dramatically alter p53 regulation. A summary of our results is presented in Table 1.
16870721	These data report the development and implementation of an improved RMCE approach that enables efficient allele modification in ES cells to generate mice and in heterozygous MEFs to accelerate phenotypic analyses. The success of RMCE-ASAP relied on the integrated use of inverted heterologous loxP sites, a positive/negative selection marker that preserves the germline capacity of ES cells, and, for somatic cells, the existence of a knock-out allele of the gene of interest. These characteristics should make RMCE-ASAP a robust and general technology for analysis of mammalian genes under conditions that preserve normal control mechanisms in different tissues. In addition, RMCE-ASAP could be used to generate fibroblastic <andsystem-candidate> lines tailored for the repeated targeting of widely studied genes (p53, c-myc, NF-KB, etc.).
16870721	Performing RMCE in MEFs. (A) RMCE with the p53GFP plasmid leads to the transient observation of cells with intense nuclear fluorescence. p53RMCE/− MEFs, electroporated with a Cre expression plasmid and the p53GFP exchange plasmid, were analyzed 48 h later by fluorescence microscopy. A typical field (left to right: fluorescence, phase contrast, merged) with a fluorescent <andsystem-candidate> (arrow) is shown. The fluorescent cell is enlarged (extreme right). (B) RMCE with the p53ΔPGFP plasmid. p53RMCE/− MEFs, electroporated with a Cre expression plasmid and the p53ΔPGFP plasmid, were selected with ganciclovir. PCR with primers d and e (Figure 3B) indicated that 9/22 ganciclovir-resistant clones integrated the ΔP mutation [top row, a representative analysis of 10 clones (Q–Z) is shown]. PCR with primers b and c next verified that the detected PRD deletions resulted from RMCE at the p53 locus, not random integration (middle row, as expected clones R, S, T and W are positive, but not Q). Western analysis of positive clones (bottom row) showed that p53ΔPGFP accumulated after ADR, but at lower levels than p53WT. (C) Phenotypic assay of p53ΔPGFP: loss of cell cycle control. Asynchronous p53RMCE/− and p53ΔPGFP/− MEFs left untreated, or irradiated with doses of 6 or 12 Gy, were analyzed (top shows a typical experiment; bottom plots results from ≥4 independent experiments and ≥3 independent MEFs). Note that the p53RMCE locus encodes a WT p53.
15921521	CF mice on a mixed genetic background (95% C57Bl/6 and 5% 129Sv) were compared to CF mice congenic on the C57Bl/6 background for several parameters of the intestinal CF phenotype. CF mice on the mixed background exhibit significantly greater survival when fed dry mouse chow, have reduced intestinal inflammation as measured by quantitative RT-PCR for marker genes, have near normal body weight gain, and have reduced mucus accumulation in the intestinal crypts. There was an indication of a gender effect for body weight gain: males did not show a significant improvement at 4 weeks of age, but were of normal weight at 8 weeks, while females showed improvement at both 4 and 8 weeks. By a preliminary genome-wide PCR allele scanning, three regions were found to be potentially associated with the milder phenotype. One on <andsystem-candidate>1, defined by marker D1Mit36, one on chr. 9 defined by marker D9Mit90, and one on chr. 10, defined by marker D10Mit14.
15921521	Previous work using human patients and genetically altered mice has identified some modifier genes and have advanced our understanding of CF pathophysiology [4]. In one study using CF mice on different genetic backgrounds, a region on mouse chromosome 7 was shown to ameliorate intestinal blockage and the effect was in part due to a calcium-regulated Cl-channel which compensated for loss of CFTR function [16,17]. Marker haplotypes of the syntenic region of human chromosome 19q13 were also shown to be associated with the risk of MI in CF patients [18]. In other work, a region on mouse <andsystem-candidate> 6 was strongly associated with lung inflammation, consisting of mononuclear cell interstitial infiltration and fibrosis in CF mouse airways; and other loci on chr. 1, 2, 10, and 17 were also linked to the airway phenotype [19].
15921521	Previous work using human patients and genetically altered mice has identified some modifier genes and have advanced our understanding of CF pathophysiology [4]. In one study using CF mice on different genetic backgrounds, a region on mouse chromosome 7 was shown to ameliorate intestinal blockage and the effect was in part due to a calcium-regulated Cl-channel which compensated for loss of CFTR function [16,17]. Marker haplotypes of the syntenic region of human chromosome 19q13 were also shown to be associated with the risk of MI in CF patients [18]. In other work, a region on mouse chr. 6 was strongly associated with lung inflammation, consisting of mononuclear <andsystem-candidate> interstitial infiltration and fibrosis in CF mouse airways; and other loci on chr. 1, 2, 10, and 17 were also linked to the airway phenotype [19].
15921521	Previous work showed that CF mice on the B6 background have an innate-type inflammation of the small intestine [21]. To determine whether the mixed genetic background affected expression of inflammatory marker genes, quantitative, real-time RT-PCR was used to measure gene expression. Expression of the following genes was compared in wild type and CF mice on the different genetic backgrounds. Mast <andsystem-candidate> protease 2 (Mcpt2) is a marker of differentiated mast cells [22] and mast cells are more abundant in the B6 CF mouse intestine. Leucine-rich α2 glycoprotein (Lrg1, [23]) is a marker of differentiating neutrophils, which are more numerous in the B6 CF mouse intestine. The same gene is also known as leucine-rich high endothelial cell glycoprotein (Lrhg) and has been shown to be a marker of high endothelial venules (HEV) [24] which increase in tissues during inflammation [25,26]. Hematopoietic cell transcript 1 (HemT1, [27]) is a marker of blood cell proliferation and its expression is strongly elevated in the B6 CF mouse small intestine. Serum amyloid A3 (SAA3, [28]) is an acute phase gene and its expression in villus epithelial cells is increased in the B6 CF intestine. Suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3, [29]) is an anti-inflammatory gene that interacts with the JAK-STAT pathway and its expression in increased in the B6 CF intestine. Muclin (also known as dmbt1, [30]) expression is upregulated in the B6 CF intestine; it is a cell surface glycoprotein postulated to be an epithelial protective molecule [21,31].
15921521	Previous work showed that CF mice on the B6 background have an innate-type inflammation of the small intestine [21]. To determine whether the mixed genetic background affected expression of inflammatory marker genes, quantitative, real-time RT-PCR was used to measure gene expression. Expression of the following genes was compared in wild type and CF mice on the different genetic backgrounds. Mast cell protease 2 (Mcpt2) is a marker of differentiated mast cells [22] and mast cells are more abundant in the B6 CF mouse intestine. Leucine-rich α2 glycoprotein (Lrg1, [23]) is a marker of differentiating neutrophils, which are more numerous in the B6 CF mouse intestine. The same gene is also known as leucine-rich high endothelial cell glycoprotein (Lrhg) and has been shown to be a marker of high endothelial venules (HEV) [24] which increase in tissues during inflammation [25,26]. Hematopoietic cell transcript 1 (HemT1, [27]) is a marker of blood cell proliferation and its expression is strongly elevated in the B6 CF mouse small intestine. Serum amyloid A3 (SAA3, [28]) is an acute phase gene and its expression in villus epithelial cells is increased in the B6 CF intestine. Suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3, [29]) is an anti-inflammatory gene that interacts with the JAK-STAT pathway and its expression in increased in the B6 CF intestine. Muclin (also known as dmbt1, [30]) expression is upregulated in the B6 CF intestine; it is a <andsystem-candidate> surface glycoprotein postulated to be an epithelial protective molecule [21,31].
15921521	Thus, it appears that whatever the nature of the genetic differences between the two background strains, they affect secretion and accumulation of mucus in the CF small intestine. To determine if the difference could be accounted for by altered mucin gene expression, quantitative RT-PCR was used to measure mRNA expression of the intestinal goblet <andsystem-candidate> mucin gene, Muc2. In wild type intestine, B6 mice had 0.079 +/- 0.024 copies of Muc2/GAPDH (n = 8), and on the mixed background the level was 0.077 +/- 0.012 (n = 11). CF mice on the B6 background had 0.059 +/- 0.024 copies of Muc2 mRNA per GAPDH (n = 11), and on the mixed background the level was 0.056 +/- 0.010 (n = 11). Despite the increased mucus accumulation in CF, there is a slight decrease in Muc2 mRNA in the CF small intestine (P < 0.0001), as previously reported [33]. However, the milder CF phenotype on the mixed background, which includes less mucus accumulation, does not involve decreased mucin gene expression.
15921521	To determine the contributions of B6 and 129 alleles to the mixed genetic background, and to identify potential modifier regions, tail DNA was analyzed by PCR for markers of polymorphisms between these two mouse strains. Mice congenic on the B6 background, which were derived from mice originally on a B6/129 mixed background, were also analyzed to confirm they are congenic B6. Twelve CF mice on the B6 background averaged 99.5% B6 alleles. One of the twelve mice had alleles from both strains at <andsystem-candidate>9, 40 cM. All twelve mice had both B6 and 129 markers on chromosome 6, 1 cM which is probably due to the targeted Cftr gene which is at chr.6, 3.1 cM [36].
15921521	Three CF mice on the mixed background were initially analyzed and were found to be 95% B6, 5% 129. A second group of 8 CF mice was analyzed and the markers used were refined to focus on the chromosomal regions showing variations from the B6 strain. The differences found from the two analyses are combined in Table 3. The differences in the mixed strain CF mice were at <andsystem-candidate>1, 92 cM (9 of 11 mice had both B6 and 129 alleles); chr.9, 9 cM (all 11 mice had two 129 alleles); and chr.10, 65 cM (10 mice had both B6 and 129 alleles).
15921521	Because the spacing of markers used was about 12 cM, genes within 75% of this interval on either side of the markers were looked at for potential relevance to the milder CF intestinal phenotype. None of the known chloride channels that might substitute for the missing CFTR are in the regions of the three chromosomes associated with the milder phenotype. There are several potassium channel genes in the identified regions that potentially could affect electrolyte and fluid transport: Kcnj9 (<andsystem-candidate>1, 94.2 cM), Kcnj10 (chr.1, 93.5 cM), Kcnj5 (chr.9, 11 cM), and Kcnc2 (chr.10, 62 cM). All gene names are from the Mouse Genome Informatics website .
15921521	Inflammation is a hallmark of CF, and whether there is an inherent defect in CF that predisposes to excessive inflammation is controversial. Several genes involved in inflammation and the immune system are located in the regions of the markers identified: TNF superfamily members Tnfsf4, 6, and 8 (<andsystem-candidate>1, 84.9–85 cM) which are involved in T cell activation [37,38]; three selectin genes (Sele, Sell, Selp, chr.1, 86.6 cM) which are involved in immune cell infiltration into inflamed tissues [39]; several members of immune cell surface proteins of the Slam family (slamf1, 2, 5, 6, and 9; chr.1, 89.5–93.3 cM) [40]; the chemokine gene Xcl1 (chr.1, 87 cM) which is expressed by mast cells and recruits lymphocytes [41]; several immunoglobulin Fc receptor genes (Fcrl3, Fcgr2b, and Fcgr3 at chr.1, 92.3 cM; Fcer1g at chr.1, 93.3 cM; Fcer1a at chr.1, 94.2 cM); the flagellin receptor Tlr5 (chr.1, 98 cM); Mmp3 (chr.9, 1 cM) which recruits CD4+ lymphocytes [42]; Mmp7 (chr.9, 1 cM) which activates Paneth cell-derived cryptdins (α-defensins) [43]; Icam1 (chr.9, 7 cM) which is involved in lymphocyte infiltration into inflamed tissues [44]; Kitl (chr.10, 57 cM) which is also known as stem cell factor, and is crucial for mast cell differentiation [45]; Im5 (chr.10, 65 cM) which is involved in antibody-responsiveness [46]; Lyzs (chr.10, 66 cM) which is a Paneth cell product that digests cell walls of bacteria [47]; Ifng (chr.10, 67 cM) which is an important inflammatory signal in CF as well as other conditions [48]; Il22 (chr.10, 67 cM), a member of the anti-inflammatory IL-10 interleukin family [49]; and the Stat2 and 6 genes (chr.10, 70 cM) which are important components of intracellular signaling pathways [50].
15921521	Inflammation is a hallmark of CF, and whether there is an inherent defect in CF that predisposes to excessive inflammation is controversial. Several genes involved in inflammation and the immune system are located in the regions of the markers identified: TNF superfamily members Tnfsf4, 6, and 8 (chr.1, 84.9–85 cM) which are involved in T <andsystem-candidate> activation [37,38]; three selectin genes (Sele, Sell, Selp, chr.1, 86.6 cM) which are involved in immune cell infiltration into inflamed tissues [39]; several members of immune cell surface proteins of the Slam family (slamf1, 2, 5, 6, and 9; chr.1, 89.5–93.3 cM) [40]; the chemokine gene Xcl1 (chr.1, 87 cM) which is expressed by mast cells and recruits lymphocytes [41]; several immunoglobulin Fc receptor genes (Fcrl3, Fcgr2b, and Fcgr3 at chr.1, 92.3 cM; Fcer1g at chr.1, 93.3 cM; Fcer1a at chr.1, 94.2 cM); the flagellin receptor Tlr5 (chr.1, 98 cM); Mmp3 (chr.9, 1 cM) which recruits CD4+ lymphocytes [42]; Mmp7 (chr.9, 1 cM) which activates Paneth cell-derived cryptdins (α-defensins) [43]; Icam1 (chr.9, 7 cM) which is involved in lymphocyte infiltration into inflamed tissues [44]; Kitl (chr.10, 57 cM) which is also known as stem cell factor, and is crucial for mast cell differentiation [45]; Im5 (chr.10, 65 cM) which is involved in antibody-responsiveness [46]; Lyzs (chr.10, 66 cM) which is a Paneth cell product that digests cell walls of bacteria [47]; Ifng (chr.10, 67 cM) which is an important inflammatory signal in CF as well as other conditions [48]; Il22 (chr.10, 67 cM), a member of the anti-inflammatory IL-10 interleukin family [49]; and the Stat2 and 6 genes (chr.10, 70 cM) which are important components of intracellular signaling pathways [50].
15921521	Inflammation is a hallmark of CF, and whether there is an inherent defect in CF that predisposes to excessive inflammation is controversial. Several genes involved in inflammation and the immune system are located in the regions of the markers identified: TNF superfamily members Tnfsf4, 6, and 8 (chr.1, 84.9–85 cM) which are involved in T cell activation [37,38]; three selectin genes (Sele, Sell, Selp, chr.1, 86.6 cM) which are involved in immune cell infiltration into inflamed tissues [39]; several members of immune <andsystem-candidate> surface proteins of the Slam family (slamf1, 2, 5, 6, and 9; chr.1, 89.5–93.3 cM) [40]; the chemokine gene Xcl1 (chr.1, 87 cM) which is expressed by mast cells and recruits lymphocytes [41]; several immunoglobulin Fc receptor genes (Fcrl3, Fcgr2b, and Fcgr3 at chr.1, 92.3 cM; Fcer1g at chr.1, 93.3 cM; Fcer1a at chr.1, 94.2 cM); the flagellin receptor Tlr5 (chr.1, 98 cM); Mmp3 (chr.9, 1 cM) which recruits CD4+ lymphocytes [42]; Mmp7 (chr.9, 1 cM) which activates Paneth cell-derived cryptdins (α-defensins) [43]; Icam1 (chr.9, 7 cM) which is involved in lymphocyte infiltration into inflamed tissues [44]; Kitl (chr.10, 57 cM) which is also known as stem cell factor, and is crucial for mast cell differentiation [45]; Im5 (chr.10, 65 cM) which is involved in antibody-responsiveness [46]; Lyzs (chr.10, 66 cM) which is a Paneth cell product that digests cell walls of bacteria [47]; Ifng (chr.10, 67 cM) which is an important inflammatory signal in CF as well as other conditions [48]; Il22 (chr.10, 67 cM), a member of the anti-inflammatory IL-10 interleukin family [49]; and the Stat2 and 6 genes (chr.10, 70 cM) which are important components of intracellular signaling pathways [50].
15921521	Inflammation is a hallmark of CF, and whether there is an inherent defect in CF that predisposes to excessive inflammation is controversial. Several genes involved in inflammation and the immune system are located in the regions of the markers identified: TNF superfamily members Tnfsf4, 6, and 8 (chr.1, 84.9–85 cM) which are involved in T cell activation [37,38]; three selectin genes (Sele, Sell, Selp, chr.1, 86.6 cM) which are involved in immune cell infiltration into inflamed tissues [39]; several members of immune cell surface proteins of the Slam family (slamf1, 2, 5, 6, and 9; chr.1, 89.5–93.3 cM) [40]; the chemokine gene Xcl1 (chr.1, 87 cM) which is expressed by mast cells and recruits lymphocytes [41]; several immunoglobulin Fc receptor genes (Fcrl3, Fcgr2b, and Fcgr3 at chr.1, 92.3 cM; Fcer1g at chr.1, 93.3 cM; Fcer1a at chr.1, 94.2 cM); the flagellin receptor Tlr5 (chr.1, 98 cM); Mmp3 (chr.9, 1 cM) which recruits CD4+ lymphocytes [42]; Mmp7 (chr.9, 1 cM) which activates Paneth cell-derived cryptdins (α-defensins) [43]; Icam1 (chr.9, 7 cM) which is involved in lymphocyte infiltration into inflamed tissues [44]; Kitl (chr.10, 57 cM) which is also known as stem cell factor, and is crucial for mast cell differentiation [45]; Im5 (chr.10, 65 cM) which is involved in antibody-responsiveness [46]; Lyzs (chr.10, 66 cM) which is a Paneth cell product that digests <andsystem-candidate> walls of bacteria [47]; Ifng (chr.10, 67 cM) which is an important inflammatory signal in CF as well as other conditions [48]; Il22 (chr.10, 67 cM), a member of the anti-inflammatory IL-10 interleukin family [49]; and the Stat2 and 6 genes (chr.10, 70 cM) which are important components of intracellular signaling pathways [50].
15921521	Also near the identified markers are a number of QTL associated with body weight: Cfbw1, CF mouse body weight at <andsystem-candidate>1, 85 cM; Obq9, obesity 9 at chr.1, 88 cM; Bw8q1, body weight 8 at chr.1, 100 cM; Lbm6, lean body mass 6 at chr.9, 7.7 cM; Bwtq4, body weight 4 at chr.9, 8 cM; Bgeq8, body growth early 8 at chr.10, 57 cM; and Pbwg5, postnatal body weight growth 5 at chr.10, 68 cM.
15921521	This work demonstrated that the CF inflammatory phenotype is much less severe in mice with a small contribution of 129/Sv alleles. A preliminary analysis identified regions on <andsystem-candidate>1, 9, and 10 are that are potentially associated with the milder phenotype. Because of the inflammation of the CF small intestine, and the possible effects of immune cells on mucus secretion, the genes in the identified regions which are involved in mast cell and neutrophil differentiation and behavior are of special interest as potential CF modifiers. Future work should focus on narrowing down these regions and determining if there are polymorphisms that affect expression of specific genes that make the CF intestinal phenotype less severe.
15921521	This work demonstrated that the CF inflammatory phenotype is much less severe in mice with a small contribution of 129/Sv alleles. A preliminary analysis identified regions on chr.1, 9, and 10 are that are potentially associated with the milder phenotype. Because of the inflammation of the CF small intestine, and the possible effects of immune cells on mucus secretion, the genes in the identified regions which are involved in mast <andsystem-candidate> and neutrophil differentiation and behavior are of special interest as potential CF modifiers. Future work should focus on narrowing down these regions and determining if there are polymorphisms that affect expression of specific genes that make the CF intestinal phenotype less severe.
16700629	The development of sexually dimorphic reproductive organs is a common feature among animal species. The testis and ovary represent two divergent pathways of development from the bipotential embryonic gonad. The switch that initiates divergent development of the gonad is highly diverse among species; however, the underlying mechanisms that lead to the establishment of ovary or testis pathways are likely to be conserved. In all species, the embryonic gonad is made up of a mixed population of germ cells and somatic cells. This tissue is remarkable in that all of its cells are believed to be bipotential, and can differentiate into ovarian or testicular lineages [1,2]. Consistent with the idea that cells in this primordium are poised between two developmental pathways, some of the genes that are involved in establishing sexual dimorphism, including Dax1 (dosage-sensitive sex reversal-congenital adrenal hypoplasia critical region on the X chromosome protein 1), Sox9 (Sry-like HMG box 9), Fgf9 (fibroblast growth factor 9), and Wnt4 (wingless-related MMTV integration site 4), are initially expressed in similar patterns in XX and XY gonads [3–8]. The conventional view of mammalian sex determination is that the basic pathway of organ development is ovarian, and that the testis-determining gene operates by diverting this program toward testis development by simultaneously influencing the fate of the key supporting <andsystem-candidate> lineage and initiating a male-specific morphogenetic program. All of the experimental evidence suggests that these two processes are closely interwoven. For example, both proliferation [9] and migration of cells to trigger testis cord formation [10,11] appear to be closely integrated with Sertoli cell differentiation.
16700629	Sry, a Y chromosome-linked gene, is the primary sex-determining gene in mammals [12–14]. In the absence of Sry expression—in XX embryos, or in XY embryos carrying a deletion of Sry—cells in the gonad follow an ovarian differentiation pathway. Genetic evidence from chimeric mice [15], and expression studies using reporter transgenes [2,16], indicate that Sry expression is required only in precursors of the somatic supporting <andsystem-candidate> lineage. Expression of Sry in these bipotential cells leads to their differentiation as testis-specific Sertoli cells rather than as follicle cells, the parallel cell type of the ovary [2]. It is believed that the Sertoli cell is the first cell type to differentiate in the gonad [17]. There is substantial evidence that a critical threshold number of Sertoli cells is required to establish testis differentiation [9,15,18–20]. In cases where this threshold is not reached, ovary differentiation ensues.
16700629	Once Sry expression begins, expression patterns of other genes in the gonad begin to diverge. The first gene downstream of Sry known to show male-specific up-regulation in Sertoli <andsystem-candidate> precursors is a related gene expressed in many tissues in the developing embryo, Sox9. Disruption of Sox9 expression in the XY gonad causes male-to-female sex reversal [21,22], whereas increasing the dose of Sox9 in the XX gonad leads to testis development [23–25]. These studies indicate that Sox9 plays a central role in sex determination. Unlike Sry, which is specific to mammals, expression of Sox9 is known to be conserved in the gonad of many species. In mammals, Sox9 is up-regulated immediately after Sry expression initiates. Experiments tracing Sry-expressing cells using a stable reporter demonstrated that once testis differentiation is established, all Sertoli cells that express Sox9 are descendants of cells that have expressed Sry [16], suggesting that activation of Sox9 is a cell-autonomous effect of Sry. However, mutations in several signaling pathways including Fgf9 and Igf1r/Irr/Ir (insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor/insulin receptor-related receptor/insulin receptor) resulted in loss of Sox9 expression and partial or complete sex reversal [26,27], suggesting that extracellular signaling pathways play a significant role during primary sex determination.
16700629	Mice homozygous for a null mutation in Fgf9 display male-to-female sex reversal caused by disruption of all testis-specific cellular events, including <andsystem-candidate> proliferation, mesonephric cell migration, testis cord formation, and the differentiation of Sertoli cells [26,27]. Fgf9, like many of the founding signals in the gonads, is initially expressed in gonads of both sexes, but becomes male-specific after Sry is expressed. In a reciprocal manner, expression of Wnt4, which is also initially common to gonads of both sexes, becomes female-specific [8]. XX gonads with a null mutation in Wnt4 display some obvious aspects of testicular differentiation [28]. Based on the theory that Sertoli cells initiate all downstream testicular differentiation, this might imply that Sertoli differentiation had been initiated in Wnt4−/− XX gonads. However, expression of Sertoli cell markers was not previously detected in these mutants during fetal stages [8,29], leading to the conclusion that Wnt4 was not involved in primary sex determination in the gonad.
16700629	To integrate these findings, we investigated the genetic relationship of Sry, Sox9, Fgf9, and Wnt4 in the regulatory network that governs the gonadal field. We show that the loss of Fgf9 in homozygous mutant XY gonads does not affect the expression of SRY or the initial up-regulation of SOX9; however, SOX9 expression is not maintained in the Fgf9−/− mutant gonads, and testis differentiation is aborted. We also demonstrate that FGF9 represses the ovary-promoting gene, Wnt4. We hypothesize that FGF9 functions in a feed-forward loop to expand Sertoli precursor cells, which secrete FGF9, to a critical threshold number sufficient to suppress Wnt4. This directly or indirectly stabilizes SOX9 expression and secures the male fate of the gonad. WNT4 seems to oppose the male pathway by repressing expression of SOX9 and FGF9. Surprisingly, both male pathway genes are transiently activated in Wnt4−/− XX gonads in the absence of the <andsystem-candidate>-linked gene Sry. Based on this genetic and in vitro data, we suggest that the plasticity of the bipotential gonad is controlled by mutually antagonistic signals between FGF9 and WNT4 in the gonadal field. These signals coordinate sexually dimorphic patterns of growth, morphogenesis, and cellular differentiation.
16700629	Using an antibody specific to FGF9, we examined expression during normal gonad development. FGF9 protein was distributed throughout the 11.5 dpc gonad in both sexes (Figure 1A and 1B). However, by 12.5 dpc, FGF9 was detected only in XY gonads in two domains: in cells near the surface of gonads and in cells located within testis cords. This sex-specific expression pattern was maintained in gonads at 13.5 dpc (Figure 1C–1F). FGF9 expression within testis cords was localized to Sertoli cells and excluded from germ cells based on the germ <andsystem-candidate> membrane marker platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule (PECAM) (Figure 1D and 1F). To confirm this result, we examined agametic gonads from KitW/Wv compound heterozygous embryos, which develop testis cords containing Sertoli cells only. FGF9 was detectable at normal levels in testis cords in XY KitW/Wv gonads, where alkaline phosphatase staining verified the absence of germ cells (Figure 1G–1J), indicating that FGF9 is expressed by Sertoli cells, and that its expression is not dependent on the presence of germ cells. In summary, FGF9 expression was present in both XX and XY gonads at bipotential stages, and became restricted to XY gonads as testis differentiation proceeded.
16700629	In our previous study we did not observe SOX9 expression at 12.5 dpc in Fgf9−/− XY gonads that fail to develop into normal testes [26]. However, the loss of SOX9 expression at 12.5 dpc could be a consequence of the loss of Sertoli differentiation rather than a reflection of the genetic interaction between FGF9 and SOX9. Normally, Sox9 is weakly expressed in wild-type genital ridges of both XX and XY embryos at 10.5 dpc and, after the onset of Sry expression, is up-regulated in XY gonads [5,33,16]. As results indicated that Fgf9 functioned downstream of, or in parallel with Sry, we investigated whether Fgf9 was involved in the up-regulation of Sox9 expression. Primary <andsystem-candidate> culture and gonad culture systems were used to assess Sox9 activation by exogenous FGF9. For in vitro cell culture, cells were isolated from 11.5 dpc gonads free of mesonephroi, and cultured on extracellular matrix-coated coverslips with or without addition of purified FGF9 in culture media. After culture for 24 h, SOX9 expression was monitored by an antibody specific to SOX9 in XX cells and control XY cells. Exogenous FGF9 increased cell number in XX and XY cell cultures compared with cells in a duplicate culture without FGF9 treatment (unpublished data), and caused the up-regulation of SOX9 in XX cells (Figure 2E–2H). Up-regulation of SOX9 had not previously been seen in whole XX gonads cultured with exogenous FGF9 [9]. To explain the difference between experimental results from dissociated XX gonadal cells and XX gonads, we reasoned that the local concentrations of FGF9 might not be high enough to override blocking signals in the intact XX gonad, or that active FGF9 was not efficiently localized or presented in the extracellular matrix of the XX gonad. To test the local effect of FGF9, we modified the XX gonad culture by stably immobilizing FGF9, or BSA as a control, on beads (Figure 2I–2K). Under these conditions, SOX9 expression was up-regulated locally in cells near the surface of the XX gonad in contact with the FGF9 bead (Figure 2K). Taken together, these in vitro data demonstrate that ectopic FGF9 signaling can induce SOX9 expression in XX gonadal cells, suggesting a positive interaction between Fgf9 and Sox9.
16700629	We previously reported that XY-specific <andsystem-candidate> proliferation is defective in Fgf9−/− XY gonads [7]. Because Sox9 acts as a positive regulator of Fgf9 expression, we questioned whether cell proliferation in XY gonads was also compromised by the loss of Sox9. We examined proliferation in Sox9Δ/Δ gonads at 11.5 dpc using a mitotic cell marker, phosphorylated histone H3. Proliferating cells were more abundant and concentrated in a domain near the surface of wild-type XY gonads, and this XY-specific cell proliferation was evident in XY Sox9flox/Δ littermate controls (Figure 3K). However, in Sox9Δ/Δ XY gonads proliferation was reduced and similar to XX gonads (Figure 3L–3O). This result supports the idea that there is a mutual interdependence between Sox9 and Fgf9 generating a positive feed-forward loop, and that both genes are required for the expansion of somatic cells, including Sertoli cell precursors, in XY gonads.
16700629	Based on the fact that Sox9 is initially expressed in Fgf9−/− gonads, we investigated whether other genes in the male pathway are activated. We examined two markers for Sertoli <andsystem-candidate> differentiation, anti-Mullerian hormone (Amh) [38] and Desert hedgehog (Dhh) [39] in Fgf9−/− XY gonads using whole-mount in situ hybridization. Dhh, which is expressed in XY wild-type and heterozygous gonads beginning at 11.5 dpc, was absent from Fgf9−/− XY gonads, although mesonephric expression was still detected (Figure 4A and 4B). Amh, which is a direct transcriptional target of SOX9 activated after 11.5 dpc [38,40], was detected at reduced levels in Fgf9−/− XY gonads at 12.5 dpc (Figure 4C–4F). The residual level of Amh suggested that the transient expression of SOX9 in Fgf9−/− gonads at 11.5 dpc was sufficient to activate Amh, a direct downstream target. However, the absence of Dhh indicated that not all Sertoli pathways are initiated.
16700629	The initial specification of Sertoli <andsystem-candidate> precursors was not affected by the loss of Fgf9, as evidenced by normal Sry and Sox9 expression in Fgf9−/− gonads at 11.5 dpc (Figures 2 and 3D). However, SOX9 expression in XY Fgf9−/− gonads rapidly disappeared (Figure 3E and 3F), and other Sertoli markers were absent or severely reduced (Figure 4A–4F). To investigate the possibility that this loss was due to cell death, we immunostained XY Fgf9−/− gonads at 12.0 dpc—a time point at which SOX9-expressing cells were declining in numbers (Figure 3E)—for active caspase-3, an apoptotic cell marker. Apoptotic cells were not observed in Fgf9−/− gonads or in littermate controls at 12.0 dpc, although Fgf9−/− samples showed somewhat increased cell death in mesonephric tubules and ducts, another site of Fgf9 expression (Figure 4G and 4H). These data suggested that the loss of SOX9 expression in Fgf9−/− XY gonads was not caused by cell death but by the disruption of FGF9/SOX9 feed-forward regulation. To determine whether the aborting of the male pathway in Fgf9−/− Sertoli precursors was associated with the transition of supporting cells from male to female differentiation, we investigated expression of Wnt4, an ovary-promoting gene. At 12.5 dpc Wnt4 was up-regulated in XY Fgf9−/− but not in XY Fgf9+/− gonad controls (Figure 4I–4K). This result suggests that Fgf9 is necessary for the down-regulation of Wnt4 in differentiating XY gonads at/after bipotential stages.
16700629	Given our finding that FGF9, a positive regulator of Sox9, is derepressed in XX Wnt4−/− gonads, we asked whether expression of SOX9 might also occur in XX Wnt4−/− gonads (Figure 6D–6L). An antibody against SOX9 revealed that expression was initially up-regulated in Wnt4−/− XX gonads at 11.5 dpc (Figure 6F and 6I), although it was rapidly down-regulated by 12.0 dpc and absent at 12.5 dpc (Figure 6I and 6L). This finding was confirmed by mRNA in situ hybridization, which also detected Sox9 transcripts in 11.5 dpc Wnt4−/− XX gonads (Figure S1). Wnt4−/− XX gonads do not increase in size comparable to normal XY gonads (Figure 6C, 6F, 6I, and 6L), and Sertoli <andsystem-candidate> differentiation and testis cord formation do not occur. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that up-regulation of SOX9 occurs in this case in the absence of Sry, by eliminating the antagonistic effect of Wnt4 and up-regulating FGF9, supporting our hypothesis that sex determination occurs by tipping the balance between these two opposing signals.
16700629	Many studies support the view that cells in the undifferentiated gonad are bipotential; the supporting <andsystem-candidate> precursor lineage can develop into follicle cells or Sertoli cells. In Fgf9−/− XY gonads, cells initially embark on the Sertoli pathway, but in the absence of Fgf9 can neither maintain Sox9 expression nor establish downstream male pathways. The loss of Sertoli cells in XY Fgf9−/− gonads is not due to cell death, but instead to a transition of supporting cell fate as SOX9 expression is lost. We suggest that in the absence of the antagonizing activity of FGF9, WNT4 signals predominate and govern somatic cell fate in the gonadal field.
16700629	The Drosophila genital disk is also a field of cells that normally follows one of two sexually dimorphic fates. For many years it was believed that the fate of each <andsystem-candidate> in the genital disk was under the cell-autonomous control of double sex (dsx), the key regulator of the sex determination pathway. However, mosaic studies have shown that the genetic sex of the cells in the anterior/posterior organizers of the disk, not the sex of the majority of cells in the disk, regulate the sexually dimorphic fate of the disk. This occurs through the sex-specific regulation of WNT, FGF, and transforming growth factor beta signaling, which in turn regulate the growth, cell differentiation, and morphogenesis of the disk [41,42]. Sex-specific regulation of gonad organogenesis in vertebrates may occur in a similar manner, where some cells are cell-autonomously responsive to the sex-determining switch; however, the establishment of the male or female program occurs through the non-cell-autonomous activity of classic signaling pathways that act in an antagonistic manner and coordinate growth, cell differentiation and morphogenesis in the gonad.
16700629	The interplay between <andsystem-candidate>-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous pathways in the mammalian gonad is not well understood. In XX↔XY chimera experiments, XX cells can be recruited to the Sertoli lineage, indicating that non-cell-autonomous signaling mechanisms operate under these conditions [15]. Other more recent studies have suggested that paracrine signals could be involved in the establishment of Sertoli cells [43–46]. The current study reveals that ectopic FGF9 can induce SOX9 under conditions in which XX cells are dissociated (Figure 2F), when an FGF9-coated bead is directly applied to the XX gonad (Figure 2K), or when the dose of Wnt4 is reduced (Figure 5G). Whether FGF9 normally acts non-cell-autonomously in vivo to recruit XY cells to the Sertoli lineage by up-regulating SOX9 is not clear. We show that Sry can initially up-regulate SOX9 in the absence of Fgf9, suggesting that FGF9 is not necessary for this step. However, FGF9 may act to trigger cell proliferation, increasing the number of Sertoli precursors above a threshold needed to stabilize the male pathway, consistent with threshold requirements deduced from earlier studies using XX↔XY chimeric gonads [15]. Since Sertoli cells produce FGF9, loss of proliferation of Sertoli precursors may result in a reduction of the overall level of FGF9, and/or other male paracrine signals, below a critical threshold level required to antagonize the influence of WNT4. This model is appealing, because it links cell proliferation, believed to be required for establishment of the male pathway [9], with Sertoli fate determination. A recent study by Yoshioka et al. [47] showed that misexpression of Fgf9 in chick nephrogenous mesenchyme led to the expansion of gonadal marker gene expression, implicating Fgf9 in gonadal cell proliferation across species.
16700629	These findings suggest that WNT4 signaling normally acts as a repressor of the male pathway by interfering with the up-regulation of SOX9 expression. One report of a duplication of the region of human Chromosome 1, which includes WNT4, led to an intersex phenotype [53]. However, the report constitutes only circumstantial evidence. Such a role is not supported by efforts to misexpress Wnt4 in XY gonads, which have led to very mild phenotypes with no evidence for defects in Sertoli <andsystem-candidate> differentiation [54]. It is possible that WNT4 protein did not function as an active signal in these transgenic mice, either because it was not expressed in the right cells, at the right time, or at the right level. Consistent with our data and the partially sex-reversed phenotype of Wnt4−/− XX mutants, other WNTs or additional female factors may be required.
16700629	The switch that controls sex determination is biologically diverse. Sry is not present in nonmammalian systems; however, antagonistic signaling between FGFs and WNTs may be the conserved mechanism that balances the gonad between testicular and ovarian fates in vertebrates. In theory, any genetic or environmental switch may tip the balance toward the male pathway. Based on our findings we propose that cells in the mammalian gonad are balanced between two competing <andsystem-candidate> fates by counterbalanced signaling pathways, Fgf9, expressed near the coelomic surface, and Wnt4, expressed near the mesonephric border (Figure 7). In mammalian XY gonads, the onset of Sry expression initiates the male pathway by up-regulating Sox9. SOX9 up-regulates Fgf9, which initiates a Sox9/Fgf9 feed-forward loop that accelerates commitment to the male pathway. In XX gonads or XY mutant gonads lacking Sry, Sox9, or Fgf9, the SOX9/FGF9 feed-forward loop is not established, and WNT4 gains control of the gonadal field. This results in the down-regulation of Sox9 and Fgf9, tilting the balance toward commitment to the female pathway. Further experiments will be required to define the molecular mechanism of FGF9 and WNT4 action. However, our in vivo and in vitro data strongly support the antagonistic relationship of these two signaling pathways in regulating expression of the testis-determining factor SOX9.
16700629	Antibodies used in whole-mount immunocytochemistry were: mouse monoclonal anti-N-MYC (<andsystem-candidate> Signaling Technology, Beverly, Massachusetts, United States; 1:100), rabbit anti-SOX9 (gift of F. Poulat; 1:1,000), rat anti-PECAM (Pharmingen, San Diego, California, United States; 1:500), rabbit anti-caspase-3 fragment (BD Bioscience, San Diego, California, United States; 1:100), and rabbit anti-phosphorylated histone H3 (Cell Signaling; 1:250). Antibody binding was detected using fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, Pennsylvania, United States) as recommended. For FGF9 immunostaining, gonads were prepared as frozen sections, and rabbit anti-mouse FGF9 (Cell Science; 1:50) and anti-rabbit IgG conjugated with peroxidase secondary antibody were used, followed by amplification with tyramide-Cy3 fluorophore (Molecular Probes, Eugene, Oregon, United States). This antibody did not detect FGF9 in 12.5 dpc ovary or Fgf9−/− null mutant gonads. Immunostained samples were mounted in DABCO and imaged on a Zeiss LSM420 confocal microscope.
16700629	(G–J) Serial sections of wild-type XX and compound heterozygous KitW/Wv XY gonads stained for alkaline phosphatase (purple; G and I) and FGF9 (red; H and J). Testis cords are formed in the absence of germ cells in XY KitW/Wv mutant gonads at 12.5 dpc (arrowhead in J). Expression of FGF9 is present in the mutant gonads where Sertoli cells are the only remaining <andsystem-candidate> type in the cords (J). Semitransparent dotted line indicates the boundary between gonad and mesonephroi. PECAM (green) marks germ cells and vascular endothelial cells (C–F, H, and J). The scale bars represent 25 μm.
16700629	(K–O) Comparison of <andsystem-candidate> proliferation in Sox9Δ/Δ versus Sox9flox/Δ gonads at 11.5 dpc using immunostaining for phosphorylated histone H3. XY-specific proliferation at the gonad surface (K) is reduced in the absence of Sox9 (L). Bar graph (O) shows quantitation of proliferation obtained by counting positive cells in the cortical region of each gonad (right brace) and normalizing to the number obtained from XY Sox9flox/Δ gonads. n = 30, with five sections of each gonad and three pairs of gonads for each genotype. PECAM, green (A–F and K–N). The scale bars represent 25 μm.
16700629	(G and H) Analysis of <andsystem-candidate> death in Fgf9−/− XY gonads using an apoptotic marker, active caspase-3 (red). No increased apoptosis is observed in XY Fgf9−/− gonads (g) compared with control XY gonads, although apoptotic cells are increased around mesonephric tubules (m) of the mutant gonads (arrow in H). Semitransparent dotted line indicates boundary between mesonephros and gonad. (PECAM, green).
14611657	We identified more than 1,200 odorant receptor cDNAs representing more than 400 genes. Using real-time PCR to confirm expression level differences suggested by our screen, we find that transcript levels in the olfactory epithelium can differ between olfactory receptors by up to 300-fold. Differences for one gene pair are apparently due to both unequal numbers of expressing cells and unequal transcript levels per expressing <andsystem-candidate>. At least two-thirds of olfactory receptors exhibit multiple transcriptional variants, with alternative isoforms of both 5' and 3' untranslated regions. Some transcripts (5%) utilize splice sites within the coding region, contrary to the stereotyped olfactory receptor gene structure. Most atypical transcripts encode nonfunctional olfactory receptors, but can occasionally increase receptor diversity.
14611657	The interaction of olfactory (or odorant) receptors with their odorant ligands is the first step in a signal transduction pathway that results in the perception of smell. The olfactory receptor gene family is one of the largest in the mammalian genome, comprising about 1,500 members in the mouse genome [1,2]. Olfactory receptors were originally identified in an elegant experiment based on the hypothesis that they would be seven-transmembrane-domain proteins encoded by a large, diverse gene family whose expression is restricted to the olfactory epithelium [3]. Subsequent studies have shown that some of these receptors do indeed respond to odorants and can confer that responsivity when expressed in heterologous <andsystem-candidate> types (for example [4]). Recent computational investigations have provided the almost complete human [5,6] and mouse [1,2] olfactory receptor-gene catalogs. However, the assignment of most of these genes as olfactory receptors is based solely on similarity to one of a relatively small number of experimentally confirmed mouse olfactory receptors or, worse, on similarity to a gene that in turn was defined as an olfactory receptor solely by similarity. While similarity-based genome annotation is a good initial method to identify genes and predict their function, in some cases it can be misleading, as genes of similar sequence can carry out different functions and be expressed in different tissues (for example, the sugar transporter gene family [7]).
14611657	Within the olfactory epithelium, individual olfactory receptor genes show an intriguing expression pattern. Each olfactory receptor is expressed in a subset of cells in one of four zones of the epithelium [14,15]. Furthermore, each olfactory neuron expresses only one allele [16] of a single olfactory receptor gene [17,18], and the remaining approximately 1,499 genes are transcriptionally inactive. While the mechanism ensuring singular expression is unknown, many hypotheses have been proposed [14,16,19]. In one model, somatic DNA recombination would bring one olfactory receptor gene into a transcriptionally active genomic configuration, as observed for the yeast mating type locus [20] and the mammalian immunoglobulin genes [21]. Alternatively, a second model invokes a combinatorial code of transcription factor binding sites unique to each gene. This is unlikely, however, as even olfactory receptor transgenes with identical upstream regions are expressed in different neurons [18]. In a third model, there would be a limiting quantity of transcription factors - the <andsystem-candidate> might contain a single transcriptional 'machine' that is capable of accommodating the promoter of only one olfactory receptor gene, similar to the expression site body used by African trypanosomes to ensure singular expression of only one set of variant surface glycoprotein genes [22]. Finally, in a fourth model, transcriptional activity at one stochastically chosen olfactory receptor allele might send negative feedback to repress activity of all other olfactory receptors and/or positive feedback to enhance its own expression. In the latter three models, some or all olfactory receptor genes might share transcription factor binding motifs, and in the first model, olfactory receptor genes might share a common recombination signal. In order to perform computational and experimental searches for such signals, it is important to have a better idea of the transcriptional start site of a large number of olfactory receptor genes. Our olfactory receptor EST collection provides 5' untranslated region (UTR) sequences for many genes and, therefore, a large dataset of candidate promoter regions.
14611657	In situ hybridization (Figure 4) shows that increased numbers of expressing cells account for some, but not all, of the difference in transcript levels between two of the genes tested by real-time PCR (genes A and D in Figure 3). We hybridized alternate coronal serial sections spanning an entire olfactory epithelium of a young mouse (P6) with probes for gene A and gene D. Southern blot and BLAST analyses show that both probes are likely to hybridize to their intended target genes and no others (not shown). Gene A is expressed in zone 4 of the epithelium according to the nomenclature of Sullivan et al. [32] (Figure 4a). The expression pattern of gene D does not correspond to any of the four 'classical' olfactory epithelial zones [14,15,32]: positive cells are found in regions of endoturbinates II and III and ectoturbinate 3, resembling the expression pattern seen previously for the OR37 subfamily and ORZ6 olfactory receptors [33,34] (Figure 4b). Counting the total number of positive cells in alternate sections across the entire epithelium, we find that gene A is expressed in 2,905 cells, about 12 times more cells than gene D, which is expressed in a total of 249 cells. This 12-fold difference in numbers of expressing cells does not account for the almost 300-fold difference in RNA levels observed by real-time PCR, implying that the transcript level per expressing <andsystem-candidate> for gene A is about 25 times higher than transcript level in each expressing cell for gene D. We note that hybridization intensities per positive neuron appear stronger for gene A than gene D after comparable exposure times, in accordance with the idea that transcript levels are higher per cell. Thus, we suggest that expression in more cells and in higher levels per cell together account for the almost 300-fold higher olfactory epithelial RNA levels of gene A relative to gene D (Figure 3).
14611657	We were intrigued both by previous reports of splicing of human olfactory receptors near the major histocompatibility complex (<andsystem-candidate>) cluster, where several genes splice over long distances to a common upstream exon [26,27] and by the idea that olfactory receptor transcriptional control could be achieved by DNA recombination mechanisms, perhaps with the result that transcripts would contain some sequence from another locus. We therefore verified that the entire sequence of each olfactory receptor EST matches the corresponding gene's genomic 'territory' (defined for this purpose as from 1 kb after the preceding gene to 1 kb after the gene's stop codon). We found no cDNAs where introns encompassed other olfactory receptor genes, as reported for olfactory receptors in the human MHC region [26,27]. Six cDNAs do extend further than a single gene's 'territory' and appear not to be artifacts of the sequencing or analysis process. In each of these cases, the clones use splice sites within the 3' UTR and thus extend further than the arbitrary 1 kb downstream of the stop codon. Five of these six cDNAs also use splice-donor sites within the coding region and encode disrupted olfactory receptors (Figure 6). In the sixth cDNA, a 2.6-kb intron is spliced out of the 3' UTR, leaving the coding region intact.
14611657	Results of our cDNA library screen suggested that some olfactory receptors are expressed at significantly higher levels than others. We used quantitative PCR to show that expression levels are indeed highly variable, with one olfactory receptor expressed at almost 300 times the level of another. Higher expression levels could be due to increased transcript number per <andsystem-candidate> and/or a greater number of olfactory neurons 'choosing' those genes. For one pair of genes we tested, expression level differences appear to be due to both factors. It would be interesting to collect data for additional genes to determine how the numbers of expressing cells and transcript levels per cell vary across the olfactory receptor family. Data from a number of previous studies also show that different olfactory receptor genes, or even copies of the same olfactory receptor transgene in different genomic locations are expressed in different numbers of cells [14,18,35], but do not address the issue of transcript level per cell. The fact that some genes are chosen more frequently, and when chosen may be expressed at higher levels per cell, is intriguing given each olfactory neuron's single-allele expression regime. The observation of unequal expression leads to a number of questions. It is known that each olfactory receptor is expressed in one of four zones of the olfactory epithelium [14,15]; do some zones choose from a smaller olfactory receptor sub-repertoire and thus express each olfactory receptor in a larger number of cells? We note that several apparently highly expressed olfactory receptors (gene A, this study, and MOR10 and MOR28 [36]) are expressed in zone 4 of the olfactory epithelium. Does activity-dependent neuronal competition [37] contribute to increased representation of the olfactory receptors that respond to common environmental odorants? Do the favored olfactory receptors have stronger promoter sequences? Are some olfactory receptor mRNAs more stable than others, leading to higher transcript levels per expressing cell? Are the favored olfactory receptors in more open chromatin conformation or more accessible genomic locations? Transcription of apparent 'singleton' olfactory receptor genes (0.5 Mb or more from the nearest other olfactory receptor gene) suggests that there is no absolute requirement for genomic clustering for an olfactory receptor to be transcribed, consistent with observations that small olfactory receptor transgenes can be expressed correctly when integrated outside native olfactory receptor clusters [35]. However, the high pseudogene count among singleton olfactory receptor genes (50%, versus 20% for clustered olfactory receptor genes) suggests that not all genomic locations are favorable for olfactory receptor gene survival, perhaps due to transcriptional constraints. It is also possible that evolutionary factors may be responsible for reduced pseudogene content of clustered olfactory receptors - gene conversion between neighboring olfactory receptors could rescue inactivating mutations in clustered genes, but not singletons. Before these questions about olfactory receptor gene choice can be answered, it will be important to measure expression levels of a larger number of genes, perhaps using an olfactory receptor gene microarray.
14611657	Our study shows that about 5% of olfactory receptor transcripts do not fit the current notion of olfactory receptor gene structure. Occasionally, an intron is spliced out of the 3' untranslated region. A number of cDNAs use splice sites within the olfactory receptor's ORF, meaning that their protein product is different from that predicted on the basis of genomic sequence alone. In two such cases, the transcript would encode a functional olfactory receptor, with the initiating methionine and first few amino acids encoded by an upstream exon, as has been observed previously for a subtelomeric human olfactory receptor gene [25]. Such within-ORF splicing might increase protein-coding diversity, although, given the small number of genes involved, splicing is unlikely to significantly affect the functional receptor repertoire. Most of the atypical splice forms we observe appear to encode non-functional transcripts, containing frameshifts or lacking a start codon or other functional residues conserved throughout the olfactory receptor family. These nonfunctional transcripts are probably aberrant by-products of the splicing system [43] that have not yet been degraded by RNA surveillance systems [40,41]. The neurons expressing these aberrant transcripts might also make normal transcripts for the same genes and thus produce a functional olfactory receptor. Alternatively, the unusual transcriptional regulation of olfactory receptors might ensure that only one splice isoform is expressed per <andsystem-candidate> (unlikely, but possible if an RNA-based feedback mechanism operates), thus condemning cells expressing these aberrant isoforms to be dysfunctional.
14611657	Olfactory receptors showing different expression levels. Different expression levels of one pair of olfactory receptors is due to different numbers of expressing cells and different transcript levels per <andsystem-candidate>. RNA in situ hybridization with digoxigenin-labeled probes for (a) gene A (AY318555) and (b) gene D (AY317365) on coronal sections of the olfactory turbinates of an adult mouse, shown at low magnification and inset (boxed) at high magnification. Endoturbinates II and III and ectoturbinate 3 are labeled in (b).
14611657	Sixty-two olfactory receptor cDNAs use splice sites within the coding region. The bar at the top represents an alignment of all olfactory receptor proteins, with transmembrane (<andsystem-candidate>) regions shaded gray and intracellular (IC) and extracellular (EC) loops in white. Above the bar, the jagged line plots information content [51] for each alignment position, with higher values representing residues conserved across more olfactory receptors. cDNAs with atypical splicing are plotted below, aligned appropriately to the consensus representation. Genbank accessions for each cDNA are shown on the right, and where more than one clone represents the same isoform, both names are given, but a composite sequence is drawn. Multiple isoforms from the same gene are grouped by gray background shading. Thick black lines represent cDNA sequence, and thin lines represent intronic sequence (with diagonal slash marks if not drawn to scale). The uppermost two cDNAs encode potentially functional olfactory receptors. A single cDNA drawn as white boxes (CB173065) is cloned into the vector in the reverse orientation. Introns that result in a frameshift relative to the olfactory receptor consensus are drawn as single dashed lines. The first in-frame methionine in the cDNA is marked with an 'M', and the first stop codon 5' to this methionine (if any) is marked with *. Most sequences are incomplete at the 3' end, as represented by paired dotted lines, although two sequences (CB174400 and CB174364), marked with '(A)n', contain the cDNA's poly(A) tail. The 'X' on sequence CB173500 marks an exon that does not align with genomic sequence near the rest of the gene or anywhere else in Celera's mouse genome sequence, and 'TM4' on sequence CB172879 notes an exon that matches to the reverse-complement of the fourth transmembrane domain of the next downstream olfactory receptor gene. For the two lowermost cDNAs, exon order in the cDNA clone is inconsistent with the corresponding genomic sequence, as represented by the curved intron lines.
14611657	Sixty-two olfactory receptor cDNAs use splice sites within the coding region. The bar at the top represents an alignment of all olfactory receptor proteins, with transmembrane (TM) regions shaded gray and intracellular (<andsystem-candidate>) and extracellular (EC) loops in white. Above the bar, the jagged line plots information content [51] for each alignment position, with higher values representing residues conserved across more olfactory receptors. cDNAs with atypical splicing are plotted below, aligned appropriately to the consensus representation. Genbank accessions for each cDNA are shown on the right, and where more than one clone represents the same isoform, both names are given, but a composite sequence is drawn. Multiple isoforms from the same gene are grouped by gray background shading. Thick black lines represent cDNA sequence, and thin lines represent intronic sequence (with diagonal slash marks if not drawn to scale). The uppermost two cDNAs encode potentially functional olfactory receptors. A single cDNA drawn as white boxes (CB173065) is cloned into the vector in the reverse orientation. Introns that result in a frameshift relative to the olfactory receptor consensus are drawn as single dashed lines. The first in-frame methionine in the cDNA is marked with an 'M', and the first stop codon 5' to this methionine (if any) is marked with *. Most sequences are incomplete at the 3' end, as represented by paired dotted lines, although two sequences (CB174400 and CB174364), marked with '(A)n', contain the cDNA's poly(A) tail. The 'X' on sequence CB173500 marks an exon that does not align with genomic sequence near the rest of the gene or anywhere else in Celera's mouse genome sequence, and 'TM4' on sequence CB172879 notes an exon that matches to the reverse-complement of the fourth transmembrane domain of the next downstream olfactory receptor gene. For the two lowermost cDNAs, exon order in the cDNA clone is inconsistent with the corresponding genomic sequence, as represented by the curved intron lines.
14611657	Sixty-two olfactory receptor cDNAs use splice sites within the coding region. The bar at the top represents an alignment of all olfactory receptor proteins, with transmembrane (TM) regions shaded gray and intracellular (IC) and extracellular (<andsystem-candidate>) loops in white. Above the bar, the jagged line plots information content [51] for each alignment position, with higher values representing residues conserved across more olfactory receptors. cDNAs with atypical splicing are plotted below, aligned appropriately to the consensus representation. Genbank accessions for each cDNA are shown on the right, and where more than one clone represents the same isoform, both names are given, but a composite sequence is drawn. Multiple isoforms from the same gene are grouped by gray background shading. Thick black lines represent cDNA sequence, and thin lines represent intronic sequence (with diagonal slash marks if not drawn to scale). The uppermost two cDNAs encode potentially functional olfactory receptors. A single cDNA drawn as white boxes (CB173065) is cloned into the vector in the reverse orientation. Introns that result in a frameshift relative to the olfactory receptor consensus are drawn as single dashed lines. The first in-frame methionine in the cDNA is marked with an 'M', and the first stop codon 5' to this methionine (if any) is marked with *. Most sequences are incomplete at the 3' end, as represented by paired dotted lines, although two sequences (CB174400 and CB174364), marked with '(A)n', contain the cDNA's poly(A) tail. The 'X' on sequence CB173500 marks an exon that does not align with genomic sequence near the rest of the gene or anywhere else in Celera's mouse genome sequence, and 'TM4' on sequence CB172879 notes an exon that matches to the reverse-complement of the fourth transmembrane domain of the next downstream olfactory receptor gene. For the two lowermost cDNAs, exon order in the cDNA clone is inconsistent with the corresponding genomic sequence, as represented by the curved intron lines.
15207008	The data so far suggest that the ancestral TACC protein played a role in centrosomal/mitotic spindle dynamics. TACC proteins were then recruited to complexes involved in protein translation, RNA processing and transcription by interactions with specific bridging proteins. However, during evolution, the TACC proteins have now acquired the ability to directly interact with components of these complexes (such as the LSm proteins, nuclear hormone receptors, GAS41, and transcription factors). This suggests that the function of the TACC proteins may have evolved from performing assembly or coordination functions in the centrosome to include a more intimate role in the functional evolution of chromatin remodeling, transcriptional and posttranscriptional complexes in the <andsystem-candidate>.
15207008	At the base of the chordate branch of life, a single TACC gene was identified in the genome of the urochordate Ciona intestinalis [11], and a partial TACC sequence from an analysis of the Halocynthia rortezi EST database [12]. This confirms the original assumption that a single TACC gene was present in the chordate ancestor. The next major event in the evolution of the chordate genome has been suggested to have occurred 687 ± 155.7 million years ago (MYA), with the first duplication of the chordate genome, and a second duplication occurring shortly thereafter. Thus, if the TACC genes were duplicated at both events, we would expect to identify four TACC genes in the most "primitive" compact vertebrate genome sequenced to date, the pufferfish Takifugu rubripes, with three genes corresponding to the human TACC1-3, and, in keeping with the proposed model for genomic duplication of the chromosomal loci for the TACC genes (discussed below), a possible fourth gene deriving from the TACC3 ancestor. Indeed, four TACC genes were identified in T. rubripes. Of these, two genes corresponded to the T. rubripes orthologues of human TACC2 and TACC3. However, the other two genes, trTACC1A and trTACC1B are clearly most related to TACC1 (Fig. 1). Although trTACC1A is highly homologous to trTACC1B, the latter encodes a significantly smaller predicted protein. The trTACC1B gene is encoded by 15 exons over approximately 7 kb of the Takifugu Scaffold 191 (see below). A search of this region using the trTACC1A sequence and gene prediction software has so far failed to identify additional exons of trTACC1B. However, given the intron/exon structure of this apparently complete gene, it appears likely that trTACC1B is active in the pufferfish, and presumably fulfils either a temporal-spatial specific function within the organism, or a distinct function from the larger trTACC1A product within the <andsystem-candidate>. Thus, based upon the surrounding chromosomal loci (see below), the trTACC1A and trTACC1B genes appear to have arisen from the duplication of the chromosomal segment containing the teleost TACC1 ancestor, during the additional partial genomic duplication that occurred in the teleost lineage. Therefore, this analysis of T. rubripes does not support the hypothesis that the region surrounding the TACC3 ancestor was included in the second round of vertebrate genomic duplication.
15207008	Alternative splicing, together with differential promoter usage has already been noted for the human TACC1 gene [18,19]. In addition, as shown in Fig. 5, we have identified additional TACC1 isoforms that result from alternative splicing of exons 1b-4a. The functions of these different isoforms are unknown, however the region deleted from the shorter variants can include the binding site for LSm7 [20] (variants C, D, F-I), and/or the nuclear localization signals and binding site for GAS41 [15] and PCTAIRE2BP [20] (isoforms B-D, S). One of these isoforms, TACC1S is localized exclusively to the cytoplasm [19], suggesting that the shorter isoforms would not be able to interact with elements of the chomatin remodeling and/or RNA processing machinery in the nucleus. Thus, changes in the complement of TACC1 isoforms in the <andsystem-candidate> may result in alterations in cellular RNA metabolism at multiple levels, and may account for the observation that TACC1D and TACC1F isoforms are associated with tumorigenic changes in gastric mucosa [18].
17020410	Interallelic complementation is defined as the ability of two differentially mutated alleles to function better together than either can on its own. Despite its near universality in lower organisms [1], its potential to contribute to clinical heterogeneity in human disease is seldom considered. Evidence of interallelic complementation at clinically relevant loci is limited to biochemical and <andsystem-candidate>-based studies of a handful of metabolic disorders with defects in enzymes including propinyl-CoA carboxylase [2], argininosuccinate lyase [3], galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase [4], and methylmalonyl CoA mutase [5].
17020410	XPD encodes one of the two helicase components of basal transcription/DNA repair factor IIH (TFIIH), a ten-subunit, multifunctional complex that is essential for multiple processes, including basal transcription initiation and DNA damage repair via the nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway [6,7]. Alterations in XPD resulting in defective TFIIH function are associated with UV-sensitive, multisystem disorders including xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), XP combined with Cockayne syndrome (CS), and trichothiodystrophy (TTD) [8–10]. XP is marked by sun-induced pigmentation anomalies and a greater than 1,000-fold elevation in skin cancer risk. Severe cases can also present with growth retardation and primary neurodegeneration [11]. CS and TTD, on the other hand, are segmental progeroid disorders characterised by progressive post-natal growth failure and primary demyelination resulting in severe neurodysfunction, but without a clear cancer predisposition [12–15]. Patients with TTD additionally display hallmark sulphur-deficient brittle hair and nails and scaling skin [13], resulting from a basal transcription defect in specific <andsystem-candidate> types [16,17]. A related disorder with the cancer predisposition of XP combined with the neurodevelopmental complications of CS (XPCS), although rare, has also been described [18].
17020410	(B) Southern blot analysis of EcoRI-digested genomic DNA from wt, Xpd†XPCS/wt, and Xpd†XP/wt recombinant embryonic stem <andsystem-candidate> clones hybridised with the 3′ probe depicted in (A). The wt allele yields a 6.5-kilobase (kb) fragment, whereas both targeted Xpd†XP and Xpd†XPCS alleles yield a 5.1-kb fragment.
17020410	(D) RT-PCR detection of mRNA expression originating from the targeted †XP and †XPCS alleles in embryonic stem <andsystem-candidate> clones using primers F1 (hybridising outside the targeting construct) and mR as indicated in (A) results in a 1,416-bp fragment.
17020410	(A) Cellular survival after UV irradiation. Rescue of hemizygous XpdTTD/KO survival by Xpd†XPCS and Xpd†XP alleles is illustrated by arrows marked A and B, respectively. UV survival of homozygous XpdXPCS/XPCS cells (asterisk) from the normally expressed viable allele (XpdXPCS) is depicted by a dotted line. Survival curves represent an average of four independent experiments; 1–2 <andsystem-candidate> lines per genotype were included in each experiment. Error bars indicate SEM between experiments.
17020410	(B) UV-UDS, a measure of global genome repair. Number of experiments: n = 15 (XpdTTD/TTD), n = 6 (XpdTTD/KO), n = 4 (XpdTTD/†XPCS), n = 2 (XpdTTD/†XP); 1–2 <andsystem-candidate> lines per genotype were included in each experiment. The asterisk indicates significant difference with XpdTTD/TTD; crosses indicate significant differences with XpdTTD/KO.
17020410	(C) UV-RRS, a measure of transcription-coupled repair of UV-induced lesions. Number of experiments: n = 7 (XpdTTD/TTD), n = 2 (XpdTTD/KO), n = 4 (XpdTTD/†XPCS), n = 2 (XpdTTD/†XP); 1–2 <andsystem-candidate> lines per genotype were included in each experiment.
17020410	(E) Xpd dose-dependent reduction of TFIIH in homozygous XpdTTD/TTD, hemizygous XpdTTD/KO, and compound heterozygous XpdTTD/†XPCS and XpdTTD/†XP cells by comparative immunofluorescence of the p62 subunit of TFIIH. Roman numerals represent different microscopic slides and Arabic numerals different <andsystem-candidate> lines labelled as follows: (I) wt cells (1) labelled with 2-μm beads, XpdTTD/TTD cells (2) with 0.79-μm beads, and XpdTTD/KO cells (3) with no beads; (II) wt cells (1) labelled with 0.79-μm beads and XpdTTD/†XPCS cells (4) with no beads; and (III) wt cells (1) labelled with 0.79-μm beads and XpdTTD/†XP cells (5) with no beads.
17020410	(F) Quantification of immunofluorescent signal from at least 50 nuclei per <andsystem-candidate> line and 2–6 experiments per genotype. Bars representing cells analysed on the same microscopic slide are depicted side by side, with wt set at 100%. The p-value indicates minimum significant difference between wt and the indicated cell lines analysed on the same microscopic slide within one experiment.
17020410	What does interallelic complementation tell us about the mechanism of XPD function? Interallelic complementation is most often observed in multimeric proteins with multiple functional domains. Unfortunately, the structure–function relationship between disease-causing mutations and XPD functional domains, including detailed structural information on XPD or even its stoichiometry within TFIIH, remains unknown. However, based on the ability of <andsystem-candidate> extracts that are defective in two different TFIIH components (XPD and XPB) to complement NER activity in vitro [26], it is likely that TFIIH (or its components) can either multimerise or exchange at least during the NER reaction. Furthermore, XPD is known to be a “loosely bound” subunit of TFIIH [27]. We thus envisage the molecular mechanism of interallelic complementation to involve the exchange of XPD molecules within the TFIIH complex or turnover of TFIIH complexes containing different XPD molecules at the site of DNA damage during the course of the global genome as well as transcription-coupled repair of either UV-induced or endogenous DNA damage.
17020410	UV survival, UV-UDS, and UV-RRS assays were performed as described previously [21,30]. For UV-RRS, average values from the representative experiment containing two wt, three XpdTTD/TTD, two XpdTTD/XPCS, and one XpdTTD/XP <andsystem-candidate> line are presented. The ~48% UV-UDS value presented in this study for XpdTTD/TTD cells differs from our previously published data of 25% UV-UDS [21], possibly because of the high variability intrinsic to the assay or routine variations in the cell culture conditions. For the incision/excision activity assay, recombinant TFIIH was prepared and assayed as described previously [27].
17020410	Latex bead labelling and comparative immunofluorescence analysis of the p62 subunit of the TFIIH was performed as described previously [16,17] using primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts at passages 2–5. Two or more <andsystem-candidate> lines per genotype (except for the XpdTTD/†XP cells, in which only one cell line was used in repeated experiments) were used, and experiments were repeated 2–6 times per genotype.
16279840	Frozen cortical or whole forebrain tissue was homogenized by sonication in five volumes of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) with 5 mM EDTA and protease inhibitors (Mammalian <andsystem-candidate> cocktail, Sigma, St. Louis, Missouri, United States), using a probe sonicator set to 50% output (TEKMAR, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States). After dilution with an equal volume of PBS/EDTA/protease inhibitor, the samples were centrifuged briefly and the supernatant used for analysis. Fifty micrograms (6E10 and CT15) or 5 μg (22C11) of brain homogenate was loaded per lane onto 7.5%, 10%–20%, or 4%–20% Tris-HCl PAGE gels (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, California, United States) and electrophoresed for several hours in 1× Tris-glycine–sodium dodecyl sulfate (1×TG-SDS) buffer (6E10 and 22C11; Amresco, Solon, Ohio, United States) or 1× Tris-tricine-SDS buffer (CT15; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, United States). Proteins were transferred overnight to 0.45-μm Optitran nitrocellulose (Schleicher and Schuell, Keene, New Hampshire, United States) in 1× TG buffer (Amresco). Blots were blocked in PBS containing 5% nonfat dry milk powder, and incubated for 3 h at room temperature in blocking solution with one of the following antibodies: mouse monoclonal 22C11 (kind gift of Konrad Beyreuther and Andreas Weidemann; [17]) diluted 1:1,000, mouse monoclonal 6E10 (Signet Laboratories, Dedham, Massachusetts, United States) diluted 1:2,500, rabbit polyclonal anti-superoxide dismutase 1 (m/hSOD1) [18] diluted 1:2,500 to 1:4,000, or rabbit polyclonal CT15 (kind gift of Ed Koo; [19]) diluted 1:1,000. Subsequently, the blots were washed with PBS containing 0.1% Tween-20, and then incubated with either goat anti-mouse– or goat anti-rabbit–HRP conjugated secondary antibody diluted 1:1,000 in blocking solution. After several additional rinses in PBS with 0.1% Tween-20, blots were developed with enhanced chemiluminescence reagent and imaged with the Bio-Rad Molecular Imager FX system.
16504143	ADAM11 is a member of the ADAM gene family and is mainly expressed in the nervous system. It is thought to be an adhesion molecule, since it has a disintegrin-like domain related to <andsystem-candidate>-cell or cell-matrix interactions. To elucidate the physiological functions of ADAM11, we generated ADAM11-deficient mice by means of gene targeting.
16504143	Our results indicate that ADAM11 mutation does not affect <andsystem-candidate> migration and differentiation during development, but affects learning and motor coordination. Thus, ADAM11 might play an important signalling or structural role as a cell adhesion molecule at the synapse, and may thus participate in synaptic regulation underlying behavioural changes.
16504143	The ADAM (A Disintegrin And Metalloprotease) family comprises membrane-spanning multi-domain proteins containing a metalloproteinase-like domain and a disintegrin-like domain. Approximately half of the ADAMs are catalytically active metalloproteases that shed a broad range of substrates, such as cytokines, growth factors, receptors, adhesion molecules [1,2]. Recent gene-disruption studies in mice have disclosed a physiological role of each ADAM. For example, ADAM10, ADAM17 and ADAM19 are critical for normal development by providing growth signals at the correct times and places [3-6]. In contrast, the functions of ADAM8, ADAM9, ADAM12 and ADAM15 are not essential for embryogenesis, suggesting a possible functional redundancy with other protease [7-10]. The remaining half, which are non-protease-ADAMs, are thought to be adhesion molecules. More than ten ADAMs have been shown to support integrin-mediated <andsystem-candidate> adhesion in vitro [11]. More recently, the finding has been reported that integrin-mediated cell migration of tissue culture cells can be controlled by distinct ADAMs [12]. In C. elegans, unc-71 gene coding a non-protease-ADAM protein have been shown to be involved in cell migration events in vivo [13]. However, the physiological roles of mammalian non-protease-ADAMs are poorly understood in vivo. Genetic deletion studies in mice have shown that both Adam2-null and Adam3-null male mutants are infertile and their spermatozoa lack egg-binding abilities [14-16]. The precise mechanism is under investigation [17].
16504143	We have reported the findings of ADAM11, ADAM22 and ADAM23 genes and their restricted expression in the human and murine nervous systems [18,19]. These ADAMs lack a catalytic motif critical for the metalloproteinase activity, suggesting that they are not proteases. We assume that these ADAMs might contribute to <andsystem-candidate> migration, differentiation and survival or synaptic regulation by binding to integrins, cell-surface proteins or intracellular signalling molecules [20,21]. We have reported severe ataxia, seizures, and death before weaning, accompanied with hypomyelination of the peripheral nervous system in Adam22-null mutant mice [22]. It has been reported that the disruption of Adam23 gene in the mouse results in premature death associated with ataxia and tremor [23]. Is spite of such extreme phenotypes, no histological defects in the brain has been observed in either Adam22-null nor Adam23-null mice.
16504143	We have reported the findings of ADAM11, ADAM22 and ADAM23 genes and their restricted expression in the human and murine nervous systems [18,19]. These ADAMs lack a catalytic motif critical for the metalloproteinase activity, suggesting that they are not proteases. We assume that these ADAMs might contribute to cell migration, differentiation and survival or synaptic regulation by binding to integrins, <andsystem-candidate>-surface proteins or intracellular signalling molecules [20,21]. We have reported severe ataxia, seizures, and death before weaning, accompanied with hypomyelination of the peripheral nervous system in Adam22-null mutant mice [22]. It has been reported that the disruption of Adam23 gene in the mouse results in premature death associated with ataxia and tremor [23]. Is spite of such extreme phenotypes, no histological defects in the brain has been observed in either Adam22-null nor Adam23-null mice.
16504143	ADAM11 is the closest paralog of ADAM22 and ADAM23, and its orthologs have been found in vertebrates, but not in invertebrates. It has been reported that the Xenopus ADAM11 ortholog, xMDC11a, has an expression pattern associated with neural development, with a proposed role in <andsystem-candidate> migration [24]; and it has been reported in analyses using Northern blot and in situ hybridisation methods that the murine Adam11 gene is expressed in both the developing and adult nervous system [19,25]. These findings led us to hypothesise that ADAM11 is an integrin binder that plays an important role in the nervous system, as do ADAM22 and ADAM23. To determine the physiological functions of ADAM11, we generated and analysed Adam11 gene-targeted mice.
16504143	These results suggest that limited brain sites, mainly the hippocampus and cerebellum, might contribute to the dominant phenotype, spatial learning impairment and motor discoordination in ADAM11-deficient mice. In situ hybridisation analysis has detected Adam11 gene expression in the pyramidal cells of CA1–CA3 fields and granule cells of the dentate gyrus in the hippocampus and in granular cells in the cerebellum [25]. It is unlikely that morphological changes during development led to impairment of spatial learning and motor coordination, and morphological alterations in the cytoarchitecture of the hippocampus and cerebellum were not observed in ADAM11-deficient mice after histological investigation using HE staining. However, because it is thought that ADAM11 plays a role in neuron-neuron or neuron-glial <andsystem-candidate> interactions, a more precise morphological investigation will be needed. It has been reported that adhesion molecules, such as neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM), are not only implicated in cell interactions during nervous system development, but are also recognised as important mediators of synaptic plasticity in the adult nervous system [35]. Changes in neuron excitability in the hippocampus, such as decreases in the post-burst after hyperpolarization (AHP), have been thought to affect long-term potentiation (LTP) [36], an experimental model of the synaptic changes thought to underlie learning and memory [37]. It has also been reported that mice lacking NMDA receptor for both NR2A and NR2C subunits showed motor dysfunction and complete loss of both spontaneous and evoked excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) in cerebellar granule cells [38]. Therefore, electrophyological studies to enable analysis of synaptic transmission and plasticity in the hippocampus and cerebellum of ADAM11-deficient mice will be needed. These studies might clarify whether ADAM11 plays an important signalling or structural role at the synaptic level and whether it participates in synaptic regulation.
16504143	The linearised targeting vector was electroporated into TT2 embryonic stem (ES) cells [40]. Homologous recombinants were selected by PCR using the following primers, AGN1: 5'-TCGTGCTTTACGGTATCGCCGCTCCCGATT-3' in the PGKneo cassette, and SGN033: 5'-GGACCCGGAAGACATTTGCACGGT-3' outside the targeting vector. Homologous recombined DNA was efficiently amplified by 35 cycles of the following amplification steps (94°C-30 sec and 68°C-5 min). Correctly targeted ES clones were injected into fertilised ICR mouse eggs at the eight-<andsystem-candidate> stage. The resulting male chimeras were mated with C57BL/6NCrj females (Charles River Japan, Tokyo, Japan), and resulting heterozygous (+/-) male and female mice were interbred to generate homozygous (-/-) mice.
16504143	The absence of ADAM11 protein in the (-/-) mice was confirmed by Western blot analysis. To be brief, the cerebellum was isolated from a six month-old mouse of each genotype and homogenised in <andsystem-candidate> lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, protease inhibitor cocktail [Roche Diagnostics]). After removal of cell debris by centrifugation, the glycosylated proteins in the supernatant were concentrated by the affinity chromatography using Con A Sepharose 4B (Amersham Biosciences Corp.). Each sample was separated on 10% SDS-PAGE, and transferred to a PVDF membrane. The blot was then incubated with monoclonal antibody against the ADAM11 (U. S. Patent 5,631,351) at 1 μg/ml. Bound antibodies were visualised with horseradish peroxidase-labelled second antibody and an ECL-plus chemiluminescence detection system (Amersham Biosciences Corp.).
16504143	Targeted mutation of Adam11. (A) Top; Domain structure of ADAM11 protein. PRO, proprotein; MP, metalloprotease-like; DIS, disintegrin-like; CR/EGF, Cysteine-rich and EGF-like repeat; <andsystem-candidate>, transmembrane; Cyto, cytoplasmic domain. Adam11 gene was disrupted by the insertion of a termination codon and a PGKneo cassette into exons 5 – 7. An MC1/TK cassette at the end of the targeting vector allowed for negative selection. The BE2K-probe used for Southern blot analysis, and the expected BamHI "B" fragments of the targeted allele (TG) and wild-type allele (WT) are indicated by arrows. The primers, AGN1 and 033 were used for the selection of the recombinant ES clones. (B) Southern blot analysis of mouse genomic DNA. The expected DNA fragments for the wild-type allele (WT) and targeted allele (TG) are 13.7-kb and 10.3-kb, respectively. +/+, wild-type; +/-, heterozygote; -/-, homozygote. (C) Western blot analysis of ADAM11 expression in the mouse cerebellum. Absence of ADAM11 protein in the (-/-) mutant cerebellum was shown using anti-ADAM11 monoclonal antibody. "P" indicates the positive control, HA-tagged mouse ADAM11 protein expressed in HeLa cells. White circle indicates mature-form of ADAM11 protein and black circle shows immature-form, which was not processed. (D) Hippocampus sections with HE stain. Scar = 30 μm. (E) Cerebellum sections with HE stain. Scar = 200 μm.
17069463	The Ran-binding protein 2 (RanBP2) is a large multimodular and pleiotropic protein. Several molecular partners with distinct functions interacting specifically with selective modules of RanBP2 have been identified. Yet, the significance of these interactions with RanBP2 and the genetic and physiological role(s) of RanBP2 in a whole-animal model remain elusive. Here, we report the identification of two novel partners of RanBP2 and a novel physiological role of RanBP2 in a mouse model. RanBP2 associates in vitro and in vivo and colocalizes with the mitochondrial metallochaperone, Cox11, and the pacemaker of glycolysis, hexokinase type I (HKI) via its leucine-rich domain. The leucine-rich domain of RanBP2 also exhibits strong chaperone activity toward intermediate and mature folding species of Cox11 supporting a chaperone role of RanBP2 in the cytosol during Cox11 biogenesis. Cox11 partially colocalizes with HKI, thus supporting additional and distinct roles in <andsystem-candidate> function. Cox11 is a strong inhibitor of HKI, and RanBP2 suppresses the inhibitory activity of Cox11 over HKI. To probe the physiological role of RanBP2 and its role in HKI function, a mouse model harboring a genetically disrupted RanBP2 locus was generated. RanBP2−/− are embryonically lethal, and haploinsufficiency of RanBP2 in an inbred strain causes a pronounced decrease of HKI and ATP levels selectively in the central nervous system. Inbred RanBP2+/− mice also exhibit deficits in growth rates and glucose catabolism without impairment of glucose uptake and gluconeogenesis. These phenotypes are accompanied by a decrease in the electrophysiological responses of photosensory and postreceptoral neurons. Hence, RanBP2 and its partners emerge as critical modulators of neuronal HKI, glucose catabolism, energy homeostasis, and targets for metabolic, aging disorders and allied neuropathies.
17069463	The Ran-binding protein 2 (RanBP2) is a large protein with several domains. Although several protein partners were found to interact with selective domains of RanBP2, none to this date were found toward its large leucine-rich domain (LD). <andsystem-candidate>-based experiments support several roles of RanBP2 in cell function, such as the production of functional proteins, control of protein trafficking between the nuclear and cytosol compartments, and control of multiple facets underlying cell division. Still, the genetic and physiological implications of the interactions between RanBP2 and its partners and of the function of RanBP2 in a whole-animal model remain elusive. The authors report the identification of two novel mitochondrial partners of the LD of RanBP2, Cox11 and hexokinase type I (HKI); and with multidisciplinary approaches probe the role of RanBP2 and its LD on Cox11, HKI, and functions allied to these. The authors found that RanBP2 exhibits chaperone activity toward HKI and Cox11. RanBP2 and Cox11 profoundly modulate HKI activity. Moreover, partial loss-of-function of RanBP2 in a mouse model induces deficits in growth rates and breakdown of glucose, promotes the down-regulation of HKI and ATP levels selectively in the central nervous system, and impairs visual function. These findings support a critical role of RanBP2 and its partners in metabolic processes and allied disease states.
17069463	The Ran-binding protein 2 (RanBP2) is a large protein with several domains. Although several protein partners were found to interact with selective domains of RanBP2, none to this date were found toward its large leucine-rich domain (LD). Cell-based experiments support several roles of RanBP2 in <andsystem-candidate> function, such as the production of functional proteins, control of protein trafficking between the nuclear and cytosol compartments, and control of multiple facets underlying cell division. Still, the genetic and physiological implications of the interactions between RanBP2 and its partners and of the function of RanBP2 in a whole-animal model remain elusive. The authors report the identification of two novel mitochondrial partners of the LD of RanBP2, Cox11 and hexokinase type I (HKI); and with multidisciplinary approaches probe the role of RanBP2 and its LD on Cox11, HKI, and functions allied to these. The authors found that RanBP2 exhibits chaperone activity toward HKI and Cox11. RanBP2 and Cox11 profoundly modulate HKI activity. Moreover, partial loss-of-function of RanBP2 in a mouse model induces deficits in growth rates and breakdown of glucose, promotes the down-regulation of HKI and ATP levels selectively in the central nervous system, and impairs visual function. These findings support a critical role of RanBP2 and its partners in metabolic processes and allied disease states.
17069463	The RanBP2/Nup358 is a unique vertebrate and large scaffold protein comprised of multiple structural and functional domains [1–4]. Several roles of RanBP2 have emerged that implicate RanBP2 in nucleocytoplasmic trafficking [3,5], protein biogenesis [6,7], the formation of the mitotic spindle, assembly of the nuclear envelope [8], and the integration of the nuclear envelope breakdown with kinetochore formation and maturation during early mitotic progression [9]. The specific interaction of RanBP2 with a diverse set of partners likely reflects a pleiotropic role of RanBP2 in <andsystem-candidate> function, possibly through the integration of multiple pathways. On the other hand, the cell (tissue)-selective interaction of RanBP2 with some of its partners may also impart cell-restricted roles to RanBP2. For example, the Ran-binding domains RBDn=1-4 of RanBP2 associate with the nuclear import co-receptor, importin-β [10,11], and antibodies against RanBP2 inhibit the nuclear import pathway in HeLa cells [3]; but such a role seems dispensable in Xenopus oocytes [12]. In addition, the combination of the C-terminal domains, RBD4 and CY (of RanBP2), associates with a subset of G protein-coupled receptors, the red/green opsin, expressed in photosensory neurons and enhances opsin functional production [6,7], while the interaction of the KBD of RanBP2 with a subset of the conventional microtubule-based motor proteins, the kinesins, KIF5B and KIF5C, occurs selectively in the central nervous system (CNS) [13].
17069463	A diverse set of additional molecular partners, each associating specifically with a selective domain of RanBP2, are likely to impart and integrate additional roles to RanBP2. For example, the cyclophilin-like domain (CLD), the internal repeat (W1W2/IR), and zinc-finger rich (ZnF) domains of RanBP2 associate specifically with components of the 19S cap of the proteasome [14], the E2 SUMO-1-conjugating enzyme (Ubc9) [15], and the nuclear export receptor, CRM1/exportin-1 [16], respectively. RanBP2 itself was also found to exhibit SUMO1 E3 ligase activity [17], supporting a direct link between RanBP2-mediated SUMO-1 substrate modification and relocation of SUMO-1 modified cytosolic substrates (e.g., RanGAP) to the cytosolic face of the nuclear pore complex (<andsystem-candidate>) [18]. Finally, RanBP2 was also found to localize prominently to the mitochondria-rich ellipsoid subcellular compartment of photosensory neurons [19] and to RanGTPase-restricted foci along cytoplasmic tracks [19], in addition to its localization at cytoplasmic fibrils emanating from nuclear pores [2,3,10,12,19].
17069463	Emerging evidence supports that the CNS-selective effects of RanBP2 may also underlie the pathogenesis of certain neuropathies. Parkin is ubiquitously expressed and interacts with the Ubc9-interacting domain of RanBP2 [20]. This promotes the ubiquitination and degradation of RanBP2 [20], possibly via the interaction of the CLD domain of RanBP2 with the 19S cap subunits of the proteasome [14]. Interestingly, the small yeast Ran-binding protein 1 (RanBP1), Yrb1p, with strong homology to the Ran-binding domains of RanBP2, is also required for <andsystem-candidate>-cycle regulated protein degradation [21]. Parkin, like RanBP2 [17], has E3-ligase activity [22–24]; and loss-of-function of parkin leads to early onset autosomal recessive juvenile Parkinsonism [25]. While the dopaminergic neuronal-restricted effects of mutations in parkin are not understood [25], parkin−/− mice exhibit mitochondrial dysfunction and energy and growth deficits, and a fraction of parkin localizes to the cytoplasmic face of the mitochondria, where together with other partners is thought to promote the degradation of selective mitochondrial substrates and to exert a neuroprotective function [26–29]. These data suggest that deficits in RanBP2 and parkin may share (patho) physiological pathways and support a multifaceted role of RanBP2. Yet clear functions of RanBP2 in animal and cell physiology remain elusive.
17069463	In addition to its presence at the vicinity of <andsystem-candidate>, we have shown previously that RanBP2 is localized to and abundant in the mitochondria-rich ellipsoid subcellular compartment of photosensory (photoreceptor) neurons of the retina [19]. We extended the subcellular colocalization studies on RanBP2 and its novel partners by immunocytochemistry to determine if RanBP2, Cox11, HKI, and mHsp70 colocalize in hippocampal neurons (Figure 3A–3C), cerebral cortex neurons (Figure 3D–3F), ellipsoid (mitochondria-rich) subcellular compartments of photosensory neurons of the retina (Figure 3G–3O), and dissociated primary glia and neuron cultures from the brain (Figure 3P–3Z). Double immunostaining with antibodies against these proteins showed that they colocalize to the mitochondria (Figure 3A–3Z).
17069463	To determine the physiological implications of the interaction between RanBP2 and HKI (and other partners), we employed a murine embryonic stem 129Ola <andsystem-candidate> line with a targeted RanBP2 locus produced by gene-trapping to produce stable inbred (coisogenic) and mixed background lines, respectively (Figure 4A and 4B). Genotyping of 299 F2 offspring revealed a RanBP2+/+:RanBP2+/−:RanBP2−/− distribution (89:210:0) that deviated from the expected Mendelian ratio and supports that the RanBP2−/− mice were embryonically lethal. E12.5 embryos show strong expression of RanBP2 in the optic vesicle and throughout much of the embryo, which had no apparent developmental abnormalities (Figure 4C). In agreement with previous immunocytochemistry analysis [19], the RanBP2 gene is expressed across mature retinal neurons, but expression in ganglion cells of the adult retina was extremely strong (Figure 4D and 4E).
17069463	(A) Diagram of the genomic region of RanBP2 disrupted by insertion trap mutagenesis with a bicistronic reporter vector between exon 1 and 2. The bicistronic transcript produces two proteins under regulation of RanBP2. Upon splicing of RanBP2, a fusion between exon 1 and β-geo (a fusion between the β-gal and neo genes) is generated, while human placental alkaline phophatase (PLAP) is independently translated using the internal ribosome entry site. Consistent with previous studies, the expression of the former is directed to <andsystem-candidate> bodies, while expression of the latter is targeted to the axonal processes [67,68]. Transcriptional 5′ RACE analysis detects a fusion between exon 1 and β-geo.
17069463	(C) Lateroventral view of a whole-mount stain of a ~12.5 dpc heterozygous embryo for PLAP and β-gal (inset picture) activities. Although PLAP was broadly expressed (e.g., somites, limbs, and CNS), the PLAP and β-Gal (inset picture) expression was particularly high in the optic vesicle (arrow). X-gal single (D) and combined staining with PLAP (E) of a retinal section of a 3-mo-old RanBP2+/− mouse. Consistent with previous immunocytochemistry studies, β-Gal activity is detected in the neuroretinal bodies and inner segment compartment of photoreceptors with conspicuously strong expression in ganglion cells. PLAP expression is found throughout the plexiform/synaptic layers and outer segment of photoreceptors (E). GC, ganglion <andsystem-candidate>; PLAP, human placental alkaline phophatase; ROS, rod outer segment; RIS, rod inner segment; ONL, outer nuclear layer; OPL, outer plexiform (synaptic) layer; INL, inner nuclear layer; IPL, inner plexiform (synaptic) layer; GC, ganglion cell layer.
17069463	In light of the association in vivo of RanBP2 with Cox11 and HKI (Figures 1 and 3), profound in vitro modulation of HKI enzymatic activity by RanBP2 and Cox11 (Figure 2), and the critical role of HKI in catalyzing a rate-limiting step of glycolysis, we probed whether RanBP2+/− mice presented disturbances in HKI, Cox11, and energy homeostasis. Monoallelic expression of RanBP2 does not affect the number of <andsystem-candidate> and their distribution in hippocampal neurons (Figure 5A, unpublished data), but it led to consistent lower expression of RanBP2 by more than 50% in the CNS (brain and retina) in 129Ola (Figure 5B–5D), but not in C57BL/6J/129Ola backgrounds (unpublished data). Hence, we focused our analysis on the inbred RanBP2+/− 129Ola mouse line. Although the levels of RanBP2 were decreased in the retina, brain, and hippocampus of RanBP2+/−mice by ~50%–60% (Figure 5B and 5C), the levels of others nucleoporins, Nup153 and Nup62, and mHsp70 and Cox11, remained unchanged (Figure 5B, unpublished data). In addition, we observed a strong decrease of the levels of HKI (3- to 4-fold) (Figure 5B and 5C). This decrease was selective to the CNS, since HKI levels remained largely unaffected in the skeletal muscle, spleen, and liver (Figure 5D). Because HKI plays a key role in the production of energy intermediate substrates and HKI is virtually the sole HK isoform expressed in the CNS [33,34], we probed the impact of HKI and RanBP2 reduction in the levels of ATP. As shown in Figure 5E, there was significant and concordant reduction in levels of ATP in the CNS (brain and retina), but not in non-neuronal tissues. Finally, we also observed partial and selective delocalization of HKI, but not of Cox11, from the ellipsoid (mitochondria-rich) to the adjacent myoid subcellular compartment of rod photosensory neurons (Figure S2A–S2E). This was also accompanied by reduced HKI levels in the inner retina, in particular in the inner plexiform (synaptic) layer (Figure S2A–S2E).
17069463	(A) Quantitative analysis of <andsystem-candidate> in dissociated hippocampal neurons of wild-type (+/+) and heterozygote (+/−) mice upon immunostaining with mAb414. No difference in the density of NPCs (3–4 NPC/μm2) at the nuclear envelope was found between RanBP2+/+ and RanBP2+/− mice.
17069463	Our findings support that RanBP2 plays a determinant role in modulating glucose and energy homeostasis. The data support that Cox1 and HKI are novel partners in vivo for the large LD of RanBP2 (Figures 1 and 2). The LD of RanBP2 exhibits chaperone activity toward folding intermediates of Cox11, and possibly, the mature HKI (Figure 1). Cox11 inhibits noncompetitively the activity of HKI with ~2–3 molecules of Cox11 (assuming formation of Cox11 dimer) required to inhibit completely the activity of a molecule of HKI (Figure 2A and 2B). Cox11 sequesters HKI by binding to HKI at a site that is distinct from the active site and effectively reduces the availability of [HKI]tot for catalysis. This is reflected by a reduction of the Vmax of HKI without significantly affecting the Km of the active site of HKI toward glucose (Figure 2A and 2B). The inhibitory property of Cox11 over HKI is suppressed by RanBP2 (Figure 2C), which by itself has a weak but significant inhibitory activity over HKI (Figure 2D). The sub-stochiometry effect of the LD of RanBP2 over the inhibition of HKI by Cox11 supports that a LD-dependent chaperonin-like mechanism underlies the suppression of Cox11-dependent inhibition of HKI by RanBP2, and that RanBP2 acts as a molecular “buffer” over HK1 and Cox11 activities. The partial loss of the RanBP2 chaperone activity in RanBP2+/− mice also leads to deficits in the sequestration of HKI in the ellipsoid compartment of photosensory neurons. This possibly underlies the mistargeting of HKI to the myoid compartment of these neurons (Figure S2). The data support that the ultimate pathophysiological outcome in HKI, caused by a reduction in RanBP2 levels and its chaperone activity, is the selective degradation of HKI as reflected by the reduced levels of HKI (and ATP) but not of other mitochondrial and <andsystem-candidate> components (Figure 5). Through this process, it is also possible that deficits in RanBP2 cause a disturbance in the equilibrium between Cox11, HK1, and RanBP2 by leading to an increase of the inhibitory activity of Cox11 over HKI that promotes the uncoupling of the interaction of HKI from RanBP2, ultimately causing HKI degradation. Regardless, lower levels of HKI likely contribute to the decreased levels in ATP, slower growth rates, and diminished ability to metabolize glucose of RanBP2+/− mice (Figures 5–7). As discussed subsequently, the ATP deficits in the retina likely account for the reduced electrophysiological responses of retinal neurons (Figure 8).
17069463	Various domains of RanBP2 have been previously implicated with a chaperone role in the <andsystem-candidate>. These include the enhancement of the biogenesis of red/green opsin by the combination of the RBD4-CY domains [6,7] and the stabilization by the Ran-binding domains of RanBP2 of the guanosine triphosphate-bound conformational state of RanGTPase and interaction of Ran with importin-β [11,40,41]. The data herein show that the multi-chaperone role of RanBP2 extends also to its LD in light of its ability to associate to distinct folding species of Cox11 and to prevent HKI from being degraded. This chaperone function is likely to be complemented by other partners of RanBP2 with similar and pleiotropic functions. For example, the combination of the CLD of RanBP2 with several subunits of the 19S cap of the proteasome [14], and of its neighboring internal repeat, W1W2/IR with the E3-ubiquitin ligase, parkin [20], and the E2 SUMO-1-conjugating protein, Ubc9 [15] may contribute to the down-regulation of HKI by 26S proteasome-mediated proteolysis and modulation of the molecular and subcellular partitioning of these partners. In this regard, it will be interesting to probe whether parkin also causes deficits in HKI in dopaminergic neurons, since parkin was reported to modulate RanBP2 turnover [20], and parkin loss-of-function also causes energy and growth deficits [26–29,42]. These data add a new dimension to the complexity of the regulation of the glycolytic pathway, in particular in the CNS, where glycolysis plays a major role in supplying energy and where the proteasome machinery may play a critical role in modulating components of the energy supply machinery [43]. This is further evidenced by the presence of genetic modifiers in RanBP2+/−mice on a mixed genetic background that compensates for deficits in RanBP2 and deregulation of its partners in glucose/energy homeostasis as observed in the coisogenic line. The presence of such compensatory mechanisms is also supported by the identification of a quantitative trait locus, which encompasses RanBP2, and modifies the expression of diabetes-related phenotypes [44].
17069463	Finally, RanBP2 appears to join other nucleoporins, such as Nup96 [58], in novel physiological functions that are vital for complex organisms and that were not anticipated from <andsystem-candidate>-based studies. The reduced expression of these proteins in whole-animal models generates phenotypes that are tissue-restricted and more importantly, do not seem to recapitulate phenotypes observed with knockdown experiments in cell-based culture assays. For example, short interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of RanBP2 [9] and members of the Nup107-Nup160 complex [59–61] have shown, respectively, to cause mitotic arrest and disruption of nuclear pore assembly and deficits in mRNA export in cell culture. Yet, haploinsufficiency of RanBP2 (this work) and Nup96 [58] predominantly produce, instead, CNS-restricted deficits in energy metabolism and alterations in the immune system linked to the down-regulation of interferon-β-regulated proteins and increased susceptibility of viral infection, respectively. While these apparent outcome disparities among experimental systems remain unclear, they could potentially result from variations in redundancies and compensatory mechanisms inherent to each experimental system. Regardless, these genetic and whole-animal models set the stage to probe novel molecular pathways in various physiological and genetic contexts, and provide also a link to pathophysiological processes underlying several human diseases.
17069463	A feeder-independent mouse ES <andsystem-candidate> line derived from the 129P2/OlaHsd strain and harboring a disrupted RanBP2 locus by insertion mutagenesis with the gene trap vector, pGT0pfs [67,68] (generated by W. Skarnes), was obtained from the Mutant Mouse Regional Resource Center (University of California Davis, Davis, California, United States). The gene trap vector contains a promoterless neo-lacZ fusion gene with a splice acceptor site at the 5′ end followed by an internal ribosome entry site (IRES) and the human placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP) reporter cassette. The RanBP2 129Ola ES line was injected into C57BL/6J blastocysts and four male chimeras were generated. These were bred into 129P2/OlaHsd (Harlan, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States) and C57BL/6J (Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, United States) females. The two resulting and independent F1s lines, with 129P2/OlaHsd inbred and 129P2/OlaHsd/C57BL/6J mixed genetic backgrounds, were tested for germline transmission by PCR and Southern blot analysis of tail genomic DNA. β-gal and PLAP activities in whole mount embryos and retinal sections were detected, respectively, by incubation with 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl β-D-galactopyranoside and AP staining buffer (0.1 mg/ml 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate, 1 mg/ml nitroblue tetrazolium in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 9.5), 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2) as described elsewhere [67,68].
17069463	A1 and B1 represent magnifications of just the distal section of the retina (inner segment subcellular compartment of the photosensory neuron layer). Note the partial delocalization of HKI to the myoid subcompartment of the inner segment of photoreceptor neurons in +/− mice (B1) and decreased levels of HKI in the inner plexiform (synaptic) layer of the retina (A and B). This is reflected by a significant increase and decrease of the mean fluorescence intensity (in arbitrary units) of HKI in the myoid and inner plexiform (synaptic) layers, respectively (E). AU, arbitrary unit; ROS, rod outer segment; RIS, rod inner segment; ONL, outer nuclear layer; OPL, outer plexiform layer, INL, inner nuclear layer; IPL, inner plexiform layer; GCL, ganglion <andsystem-candidate> layer; E and M are, respectively, the ellipsoid (mitochondria-rich) and myoid compartments of photosensory neurons.
15061865	Schultz and colleagues have demonstrated that dopamine cells display consistent tonic firing patterns during maintenance of associative learning tasks [33]. However, phasic burst activity of dopaminergic cells occurs when discrepancies between predicted and actual reinforcement contingencies transpire [14]. This robust increase of dopaminergic <andsystem-candidate> activation in response to unpredicted outcomes has been referred to as an "error" signal [14]. To date, the molecular basis of this error signal has not been identified. The inability of the D2R-/- mice to desist responding to a previously reinforced stimulus suggests that the dopamine D2R might in fact be the focal point of this error-signaling cascade.
16121256	(B) Southern blot analysis of EcoRI-digested genomic DNA from ES cells screened by PCR. Probe A, a DNA fragment consisting of a portion of exon 10 that is not present in the targeting vector, hybridizes to an endogenous 3.1-kb fragment and, upon homologous recombination, to a 13.2-kb fragment. Lane 1 represents a wild-type ES <andsystem-candidate> line, and Lane 2 and 3 represent targeted ES cell lines.
16121256	ES <andsystem-candidate> clones were screened by PCR (data not shown) and confirmed by Southern blot analysis. Southern blot analysis used an exon 10 probe (probe A), not present in the targeting vector, hybridized to a 13.2-kb band in addition to the 3.1-kb endogenous band indicating targeted insertion of the vector at the Acadm locus (Figure 1B). Correctly targeted ES cell clones were microinjected into B6 (C57BL/6NTac) blastocysts to generate chimeric mice. Chimeric mice were backcrossed to both 129P2 and B6 inbred mice to produce MCAD+/− and eventually MCAD−/− mice on a B6/129 mixed background. The studies described here were conducted exclusively on the B6/129 mixed background compared with littermate controls or B6/129 control groups maintained by intercrosses as were the mutants. Perpetuating this mutation as a congenic mutant line on the 129P2 background proved impractical. The 129P2 mice were poor breeders as wild-types, and when introduced, the Acadm mutation was nearly lost on this background because of the high rate of neonatal death. Because of the molecular structure of the targeted allele, it proved virtually impossible to distinguish all three potential genotypes. We could clearly detect the presence or absence of the targeted allele, however, whether a particular mouse was MCAD−/− or MCAD+/− could not be determined by Southern blot or PCR of genomic DNA. Ultimately MCAD−/− mice were ascertained by immunoblot analysis of offspring with subsequent perpetuation of MCAD−/− and MCAD+/+ mice as separate groups.
16121256	Enzyme activity was analyzed in mouse liver homogenates using the electron transport flavoprotein (<andsystem-candidate>) reduction assay with octanoyl-CoA (C8:0) and palmitoyl-CoA (C16:0) as substrates. MCAD−/− mice had a significant reduction in ability to dehydrogenate octanoyl-CoA and a modest reduction in activity toward palmitoyl-CoA compared to MCAD+/+ mice (Table 1). Specifically, the dehydrogenation of octanoyl-CoA and palmitoyl-CoA substrates were reduced by 75% and by 30%, respectively, in MCAD−/− mice as compared to MCAD+/+ controls.
16121256	<andsystem-candidate> reduction assays of liver homogenates were performed to characterize the MCAD−/− mice at the enzymatic level. MCAD−/− mice had a significantly reduced ability to dehydrogenate C8-CoA, as is the case in human patients where MCAD activity is reduced to near zero with C8-CoA . This was less so with palmitoyl-CoA (C16:0). Because there was clearly no MCAD antigen detected in MCAD−/− mice, the residual dehydrogenase activity measured with these two substrates must represent the activity of other chain length–specific acyl-CoA dehydrogenases.
16121256	The Acadm insertion vector was linearized by SalI digestion, the site of the 1.3-kb genomic fragment deletion, and electroporated into E14–1 ES cells (a kind gift from R. Kuhn), derived from 129P2 mice. Correctly targeted Acadm insertion vector was designed to undergo gap repair of the 1.3-kb deletion upon double stranded–break repair [26] during homologous recombination. Southern blot analysis was conducted to confirm homologous recombination. Genomic DNA from G418 resistant ES colonies was digested with EcoRI, electrophoresed, blotted, and probed with an 850-bp probe (probe A) generated by PCR from Acadm exon 10 to intron 10. This DNA fragment is not present within Acadm insertion vector and was expected to hybridize to a 13.2-kb genomic DNA fragment upon homologous recombination. Correctly targeted ES <andsystem-candidate> clones were microinjected into B6 blastocysts to generate chimeric mice. Chimeric mice were subsequently backcrossed to B6 and 129P2 mice to produce gene-targeted mice AcadmtmUab1/+ (MCAD+/−) and eventually AcadmtmUab1/tm1Uab MCAD−/− (B6;129) mice. Mice were negative for mouse pathogens based on serological assays for ten different viruses, aerobic bacterial cultures of nasopharynx and cecum, examinations for endo- and ectoparasites, and histopathology of all major organs.
16121256	In order to evaluate MCAD activity in mice, liver homogenates were prepared from MCAD+/+ (n = 5) and MCAD−/− mice (n = 5). The sensitive and highly specific anaerobic <andsystem-candidate> reduction assay was used on tissue extracts with octanoyl-CoA (C8) and palmitoyl-CoA (C16) as substrate as previously described [29].
16216087	A direct contribution to the phenotype by Ca2+ influx through genetically modified AMPA channels seems to be likely, since mice expressing Q/R site-unedited GluR-B showed even better odor learning and discrimination performance compared with mice with depleted GluR-B. In both mouse models Ca2+ influx through AMPA channels is increased, whereas the effect on the macroscopic AMPA conductance differs. AMPAR currents are reduced in mice not expressing GluR-B [51], possibly due to fewer synaptic AMPA channels and impaired AMPAR trafficking and recycling. In mice expressing the unedited form of GluR-B(Q), macroscopic conductance in whole-<andsystem-candidate> patches of CA1 pyramidals is increased [60], but excitatory transmission in CA3-to-CA1 cell synapses is somewhat reduced, in spite of a lower threshold for generating a population spike [58], indicating increased synaptic excitability by sustained GluR-B(Q) expression, in line with the seizure-prone phenotype. Yet, both mouse models yield enhanced discrimination and learning capability. The milder phenotype upon GluR-B depletion could be attributed to reduced AMPAR densities at synapses [40,41] and therefore probably to a lesser extent of Ca2+ influx. This is further supported by kainate-induced Co2+ uptake in acute brain slices, revealing considerably higher Co2+ uptake via Ca2+-permeable AMPARs in hippocampal pyramidal neurons of mice expressing GluR-B(Q), than those lacking GluR-B (DRS, RS, and PHS, unpublished data).
16098226	We used bioinformatics techniques to characterise a highly conserved peptide at the C-terminus of the PAX6 protein. Yeast two-hybrid library screens were then carried out to identify brain-expressed proteins that interact with the C-terminal peptide and with the entire PAX6 proline-serine-threonine-rich domain. Three novel PAX6-interacting proteins were identified: the post-synaptic density (<andsystem-candidate>) protein HOMER3, the dynein subunit DNCL1, and the tripartite motif protein TRIM11. Three C-terminal PAX6 mutations, previously identified in patients with eye malformations, all reduced or abolished the interactions.
16098226	The PAX6 protein is a member of the PAX (paired-box) family of transcriptional regulators and is essential for normal ocular and neural development [1]. Heterozygous mutations of the human PAX6 gene cause aniridia (absence of the iris) and a range of other congenital eye malformations [2]. Neural defects such as foveal hypoplasia and optic nerve hypoplasia are common in PAX6-associated eye disease [3-5]. Homozygous mutations in man and mouse are lethal and result in severe developmental abnormalities including anophthalmia, severe reduction of the olfactory structures and gross brain malformations [2,6]. The roles of PAX6 in brain development have mainly been studied in homozygous mutant mice or rats and include arealisation of the cerebral cortex [7], formation of the prosencephalon-mesencephalon boundary [8], <andsystem-candidate> guidance [8], differentiation of neurons from glia [9] and neuronal migration in the cerebellum [10].
16098226	The Pax6 gene has a spatially and temporally complex expression pattern in the eye, brain, nasal structures, spinal cord and pancreas [1]. Although PAX6 is clearly involved in multiple developmental processes, common themes are now emerging concerning the role of PAX6 in neural tissues. Gradients of Pax6 expression are important for determining positional characteristics in the retina [18] and the neocortex [7]. PAX6 plays a role in development of specific axonal connections between the retina and the brain [18] and within the forebrain [8,19]. It is also involved in the differentiation of neural <andsystem-candidate> types from multipotent precursors in the retina [16] and the cerebral cortex [9] through activation of bHLH genes such as Ngn2 and Mash1. These studies provide a clear link between PAX6 function in the retina and the brain, and are of particular relevance to the neurological phenotypes of individuals with PAX6 mutations.
16098226	HOMER3 is a member of the HOMER family of neuronal post-synaptic density (<andsystem-candidate>) proteins [35]. DNCL1 is a subunit of two motor protein complexes, dynein and myosin-Va, both of which are involved in intracellular trafficking of proteins and organelles in neurons [36,37]. TRIM11 is a member of the tripartite motif protein family and contains a RING finger, a B-box zinc finger, a coiled coil domain and a B30.2 domain [38]. The possible significance of the interactions between these proteins and PAX6 is discussed below.
16098226	HOMER3 is found in the <andsystem-candidate> of neurons and directly binds to type I metabotropic glutamate receptors, which act via phospholipase C to stimulate IP3-mediated release of Ca2+ from intracellular vesicles [35,39]. HOMER3 is a member of the HOMER family of proteins that are constitutively expressed in the brain and play a role in post-synaptic signalling and receptor trafficking by forming multivalent links with various receptors and PSD scaffolding proteins [35,39-41]. HOMER proteins have also been implicated in axon guidance during brain development [42].
16098226	HOMER3 is found in the PSD of neurons and directly binds to type I metabotropic glutamate receptors, which act via phospholipase C to stimulate IP3-mediated release of Ca2+ from intracellular vesicles [35,39]. HOMER3 is a member of the HOMER family of proteins that are constitutively expressed in the brain and play a role in post-synaptic signalling and receptor trafficking by forming multivalent links with various receptors and PSD scaffolding proteins [35,39-41]. HOMER proteins have also been implicated in <andsystem-candidate> guidance during brain development [42].
16098226	DNCL1 is a subunit of two intracellular transport protein complexes, dynein and myosin Va [36]. Dynein and myosin Va are involved in the microtubule-based and actin-based movement respectively of proteins, organelles and vesicles in neurons [36,37]. Myosin Va is enriched in the <andsystem-candidate> [43], and DNCL1 binds to a variety of PSD proteins including guanylate kinase domain-associated protein [44] and neuronal nitric oxide synthase [45].
16098226	At present our data must be considered preliminary because the interactions have not been confirmed by any other approach. However it is interesting to speculate that the interaction of PAX6 with HOMER3 and DNCL1 may be the basis of a mechanism by which synaptic signalling causes changes in gene expression. We propose that PAX6 is sequestered in the <andsystem-candidate> by binding to HOMER3. Since receptor activation causes dissociation of HOMER proteins [35], PAX6 may be released as a result of synaptic activity, allowing it to interact with DNCL1. The PAX6/DNCL1 complex could then participate in myosin Va-mediated transport along the PSD-associated actin cytoskeleton followed by dynein-mediated transport along the microtubule network, eventually reaching the nucleus [36]. Since TRIM11 is implicated in protein degradation [46], it may play a role in PAX6 protein turnover.
16098226	Precedents for association of transcription factors with the post-synaptic density include STAT3 and CREB, which act as messengers between the synapse and the nucleus [47,48]. Although the full-length PAX6 protein is predominantly nuclear, there is good evidence in mouse, quail and nematode for an isoform that lacks the paired domain, is both nuclear and cytoplasmic, and binds DNA through the homeodomain alone [49-51]. In mice the paired-less isoform is relatively abundant in brain [49]; however its subcellular localisation in neurones, and the possibility of an association with the <andsystem-candidate>, remains to be investigated.
16098226	Regarding the subcellular localisation of the putative interacting proteins, HOMER3 is predominantly found at the interface between the <andsystem-candidate> and the cytoplasm [39], DNCL1 is chiefly cytoplasmic, although nuclear localisation has been reported [51], and TRIM11 is both nuclear and cytoplasmic [38]. Therefore cytoplasmic PAX6 could potentially interact with all three proteins, while nuclear PAX6 could interact with TRIM11 and DNCL1. At the tissue level, HOMER3 expression has been detected in thymus and lung but it has mainly been studied in brain where it is found in the forebrain, hippocampus and cerebellum [39]. DNCL1 and TRIM11 both have wide expression domains that include the brain [44,38]. Thus the expression of all three interactors overlaps with PAX6 at the tissue level [2,7,8,10]. We detected co-expression of PAX6, HOMER3, DNCL1 and TRIM11 by RT-PCR in human adult brain RNA (IH, L Harrison and A Brown, data not shown).
16579849	To create a murine model of classic MSUD, we used gene targeting and embryonic stem <andsystem-candidate> technologies to create a mouse line that lacked a functional E2 subunit gene of branched-chain keto acid dehydrogenase. To create a murine model of intermediate MSUD, we used transgenic technology to express a human E2 cDNA on the knockout background. Mice of both models were characterized at the molecular, biochemical, and whole animal levels.
16579849	The objective of the present study was to create genetically engineered murine models of MSUD that mimic the pathology of the classic and intermediate variant forms of the human disease. The classic model was created by targeted inactivation of the E2 subunit of BCKDH by homologous recombination in embryonic stem (ES) cells. The model of intermediate MSUD was created by partial transgenic rescue of the E2 gene knockout. This report describes the generation and characterization of these murine models of MSUD. These models will allow for the development of novel treatment approaches, such as gene or stem <andsystem-candidate> therapies, to ultimately cure MSUD.
16579849	E2 gene knockout mouse production. A, Gene targeting strategy used for targeting the E2 locus in mouse ES cells. The targeting construct was designed to delete 1.67 kb of sequence between an EcoRV site in Exon 4 and a Smal site in intron 5. The wild type E2 gene contains an ~16 kb BglI restriction fragment that hybridizes to the Exon 6 specific probe. A correctly targeted E2 locus harbors an ~11 kb BglI restriction fragment that hybridizes to the same probe. Note that the probe will not detect random integration of the targeting vector because it is external to the targeting vector. B, Southern blot analysis of Bgll digested genomic DNA derived from the parental wild type ES <andsystem-candidate> line (R1), a heterozygous targeted ES cell line (362), and from wild type (+/+), heterozygous (+/-) and homozygous knockout (-/-) mice. The blot was hybridized with an Exon 6 specific probe. C, Immunohistochemical analysis of fresh frozen liver sections from control (+/+) and E2 knockout (-/-) postnatal day 1 mouse pups. Sections were stained for E2 using an E2 specific antibody (green) and a nuclear stain (blue). Note the complete absence of E2 immunoreactivity in the section from the knockout mouse. D, Similar results were observed upon immunohistochemical analysis of primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). Note that the readily detectable signal for E2 in the control cells was present in a pattern characteristic of mitochondria, the subcellular location of BCKDH.
16579849	To create E2 knockout mice, we used gene targeting in mouse ES cells to disrupt the E2 gene. The overall strategy for disrupting the E2 gene is illustrated in Fig. 1A. The gene targeting construct was designed to replace a 1.67 kb EcoRV/Smal genomic DNA fragment encompassing part of Exon 4 and all of Exon 5 with the PGKneo selectable marker cassette. Of 522 ES <andsystem-candidate> clones screened for targeting by Southern blot analysis, 29 (5%) displayed the predicted restriction fragment length polymorphisms indicative of gene targeting at the E2 locus. As illustrated in Fig. 1A and 1B, an E2 Exon 6 specific probe, which is external to the targeting construct, hybridizes to only a ~16 kb BglI restriction fragment from the wild type allele in the parental R1 ES cell line. In correctly targeted ES cells, this probe also hybridizes to a ~11 kb BglI restriction fragment. Targeting was confirmed with several additional restriction enzymes and probes (data not shown).
16579849	The most significant opportunity presented by the MSUD mouse models is to test novel treatments such as gene [38-41] and <andsystem-candidate> based therapies (e.g., hepatocytes [42,43] or embryonic stem cells [44]). Relevant to gene therapy, recent problems with gene therapy in humans highlight the importance and critical need of animal models of genetic diseases for preclinical studies. The testing of gene and cell based therapies on appropriate animal model systems provides a preliminary method of establishing not only the efficacy, but also short- and long-term safety. Success with animal studies is expected to advance such therapeutic approaches and could pave the way for studies in humans. In addition to testing various treatments, these models should also be very useful for investigating the underlying pathophysiologic consequences of the disease. Such studies are very difficult/impossible to do in human patients for obvious ethical reasons, and often must rely on autopsy tissue. Additionally, the intermediate MSUD model may also be useful for studies to test the effect of thiamin. A thiamin-responsive form of MSUD has been described [1]. The phenotype of these patients is heterogeneous and treatment with a wide range of thiamin doses has produced limited success [1]. Recent cell culture studies with MSUD cells have suggested that the thiamin-responsive phenotype is dependent upon the presence of at least one E2 expressing allele [45,46]. In light of these newer findings, our intermediate MSUD mouse provides a model to test the effect of thiamin with respect to BCKDH activity and blood amino acid levels at the level of the whole animal. Because of recent interest in structural analysis of multienzyme complexes [35,36,45,46], the intermediate MSUD model may provide a valuable resource for studies of structural biology. Lastly, the information and knowledge gained from studies with the MSUD models described here will also be applicable and transferable to other mitochondrial disorders due to defects in multisubunit enzymes.
16579849	The abbreviations used are: MSUD, Maple Syrup Urine Disease; BCKDH, branched chain ketoacid dehydrogenase; BCAA, branched chain amino acids; ENU, N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea; BCAT, branched chain aminotransferase; ES <andsystem-candidate>, embryonic stem cell; TRE, tetracycline responsive element; MEF, mouse embryonic fibroblast.
15938754	Physical mapping of the single linked marker, D6Mit13, and the two closest unlinked markers, D6Mit61and D6Mit374, was performed in silico based on the May, 2004 build of the public B6 genome. Based on these marker positions, the size of the QHCl chromosome 6 QTL is less than 5.0 Mb (Figure 3). This region contains a number of known genes, all but eleven of which encode members of two large receptor families: natural killer <andsystem-candidate> lectin-like receptors, and T2R-type taste receptors. The Tas2r genes (which encode the T2Rs) are found clustered within a 1.2 Mb interval on either side of D6Mit13 (Figure 3, Figure 4). Because of their proximity to the linked marker, their demonstrated expression in taste receptor cells, and their role in the detection of at least some bitter-tasting compounds, we hypothesized that one or more of the 24 Tas2rs at this locus were responsible for the major QHCl taste sensitivity QTL.
12925238	The role of annexin A7 in red blood cells was addressed in erythrocytes from anxA7-/- mice. Interestingly, the Ca2+-mediated vesiculation process was not impaired. Also, the membrane organization appeared not to be disturbed as assessed using gradient fractionation studies. Instead, lack of annexin A7 led to an altered <andsystem-candidate> shape and increased osmotic resistance of red blood cells. Annexin A7 was also identified in platelets. In these cells its loss led to a slightly slower aggregation velocity which seems to be compensated by an increased number of platelets. The results appear to rule out an important role of annexin A7 in membrane fusion processes occurring in red blood cells. Instead the protein might be involved in the organization of the membrane cytoskeleton. Red blood cells may represent an appropriate model to study the role of annexin A7 in cellular processes.
12925238	We have demonstrated the presence of both annexin A7 isoforms in red blood cells and the presence of the small isoform in platelets. In both <andsystem-candidate> types the loss of annexin A7 impairs cellular functions. The defects observed are however not compatible with a crucial role for annexin A7 in membrane fusion processes in these cell types.
12925238	Red blood cells undergo various biochemical or morphological changes that appear to be Ca2+-dependent processes [18,19]. One of them is the release of hemoglobin-containing exovesicles occurring in vivo as well as in vitro [7,20]. This process is thought to represent a protective method of the red blood <andsystem-candidate> against an attack by for example complement components. Red blood cells which lack the ability to vesiculate cause a disease with red blood cell destruction and haemoglobinuria [21]. There exist two types of vesicles, micro- and nanovesicles with a size of 180 nm and 60 nm, respectively. They are enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipid rich lipid raft domains that are associated with proteins like acetylcholinesterase, cell surface proteins including a complement receptor, and the lipid raft proteins stomatin and flotillin, but they lack any cytoskeletal protein [7]. Furthermore, they contain sorcin and annexin A7 attached to the lipid rafts. Both proteins are more abundant in nanovesicles. The vesicle formation goes along with several other changes in the red blood cell like cytoskeletal rearrangements and changes in the phospholipid orientation in the cellular membrane.
12925238	Red blood cells undergo various biochemical or morphological changes that appear to be Ca2+-dependent processes [18,19]. One of them is the release of hemoglobin-containing exovesicles occurring in vivo as well as in vitro [7,20]. This process is thought to represent a protective method of the red blood cell against an attack by for example complement components. Red blood cells which lack the ability to vesiculate cause a disease with red blood cell destruction and haemoglobinuria [21]. There exist two types of vesicles, micro- and nanovesicles with a size of 180 nm and 60 nm, respectively. They are enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipid rich lipid raft domains that are associated with proteins like acetylcholinesterase, <andsystem-candidate> surface proteins including a complement receptor, and the lipid raft proteins stomatin and flotillin, but they lack any cytoskeletal protein [7]. Furthermore, they contain sorcin and annexin A7 attached to the lipid rafts. Both proteins are more abundant in nanovesicles. The vesicle formation goes along with several other changes in the red blood cell like cytoskeletal rearrangements and changes in the phospholipid orientation in the cellular membrane.
12925238	Its presence in vesicles led to the suggestion, that, along with raft domains, annexin A7 plays a role in membrane organization and the vesiculation process. To examine this, we analysed the ability of red blood cells derived from the annexin A7 knock out mice (anxA7-/-) to form exovesicles. Because of better accessibility and larger available amounts that led to clear results, we included our data obtained with human blood. Independent of the presence of annexin A7 both types of exovesicles, micro- and nanovesicles, were released after Ca2+/ionophore treatment as determined by acetylcholine esterase activity and microscopic examination. Annexin A7 is present in both vesicle types where it is more enriched in nanovesicles (Fig. 2). The 51 kDa isoform is only detectable in nanovesicles. The quantity of both vesicle types did not differ between wild type and knock out red blood <andsystem-candidate> vesicles as determined by the AChE-values (A405 nanovesicles: ~0.18; A405 microvesicles: ~0.9; both, for wt and ko). It appears that annexin A7, although it has been described to fuse membranes, is not a key component in the process of the formation of red blood cell exovesicles. When we probed for the presence of sorcin in wild type and mutant vesicles we found that the sorcin levels were reduced in the mutant nanovesicles (Fig. 2).
12925238	Association of annexin A7 and sorcin with distinct red blood <andsystem-candidate> plasma membrane fractions. Lysed human red blood cells were added to a self forming iodixanol density gradient. The density of the gradient increases from left (1.06 g/ml) to right (1.20 g/ml). Fractions were analysed by immunoblotting using mAb 203–217 and the sorcin polyclonal antibody.
12925238	As annexin A7 is a component of red blood <andsystem-candidate> vesicles we studied the consequences of the loss of the protein in the anxA7-/-mouse for red blood cell morphology and osmotic resistance. In a standard 'blood smear' we did not note a deformation of the cells, however dark field microscopy revealed changes in shape and diameter of the anxA7-/-red blood cells. They had a statistically significant larger cell diameter of 6.0 μm compared to wild type with 5.7 μm (p = 0.015, n = 40), a remarkably lower emphasized central impression and a more flat shape (Fig. 4). No significant change in the mean corpuscular volume (MCV) was measured with the ADVIA 120 cell counter.
12925238	Shape and MCV of a red blood <andsystem-candidate> essentially influence its function and capillary passage. The typical biconcave form depends on various influences including the membrane lipid composition and the submembranous cytoskeleton [32] where annexin A7 might play a role. The osmotic resistance, which is the resistance towards changes in the extracellular ionic strength, is a convenient assay for analysis of the red blood cell integrity. It is measured as the sodium chloride concentration at which cellular lysis starts (minimal resistance) up to a complete lysis (maximal resistance) of the cells [33]. Osmotic resistance increases with higher MCV, larger surface area and a higher degree of cellular metabolism stabilizing the intracellular ion levels. Aged red blood cells show a lowered MCV and lower osmotic resistance [33]. Similar properties can be observed in red blood cells with lowered membrane permeability. The osmotic resistance of annexin A7 deficient red blood cells is significantly increased compared to wild type cells. The minimal resistance value of knock out cells is observed in a 0.60 % NaCl solution versus 0.65 % for wild type cells. 50 % haemolysis is achieved at 0.516 % NaCl solution for knock out versus 0.564 % NaCl for wild type cells (mean values, p = 0.00066, n = 8; Fig. 5). The resistance width of the knock out cells is slightly lower (0.20 % instead of 0.25 % NaCl solution). We also performed direct measurements of the red blood cell membrane deformability, to further characterize a possible role of annexin A7 on the membrane stability. With micropipette experiments we tried to correlate mechanical characteristics of the red blood cells with their morphology. We could not observe any statistically significant difference of values describing membrane rigidity and lysis force in these experiments (M. Heil, B. Hoffmann and R. Merkel, unpublished results). However, the distinction observed in the osmotic resistance experiments was highly significant and reflects a mean value over a high number of different red blood cells.
12925238	Osmotic resistance curves of red blood cells from wild type and anxA7-/- mutant mice. The osmotic resistance towards changes in the extracellular ionic strength is a convenient assay for analysis of the red blood <andsystem-candidate> integrity. It is measured as a sodium chloride concentration in which cellular lysis starts (minimal resistance) up to a complete lysis (maximal resistance) of a red blood cell. The osmotic resistance of annexin A7 deficient red blood cells is significantly increased compared to the one of wild type (p = 0.00066; n = 8).
12925238	The use of an advanced electronic <andsystem-candidate> counter/flow cytometer (ADVIA 120) allowed us to screen other parameters as well despite of the limited murine blood volume. We analysed leukocytes, red blood cells, haemoglobin content, haematocrit, mean cellular volume, mean cellular haemoglobin, mean cellular haemoglobin concentration, platelets, neutrophiles, lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophiles and basophiles. In these tests of whole blood we found only a change in the platelet numbers, whereas all other haematological parameters were not affected. The mean platelet counts from wild type and anxA7-/- mutant mice are determined as 674 × 103/μl and 774 × 103/μl, respectively. The platelet counts in knock out mice are significantly higher (p = 0.0275; n knock out = 11, n wild type = 14). An increase in platelet counts is a rather uncommon disorder. In humans, platelet counts normally increase only transiently as in reactive thrombocytosis and under postoperative conditions or are largely increased in neoplastic diseases. By contrast, the anxA7-/-mice are healthy and viable. Therefore we tested the platelet function and performed aggregometry measurements with platelet rich plasma. Platelet activation is observed as a morphological change from the resting discoid state to activated spherical cells with pseudopods. The morphological changes are due to cytoskeletal rearrangements. In vitro the activated cells form aggregates recruiting additional cells in the solution thereby reducing its cloudiness. Analysis of the transmission values of aggregation curves after platelet activation by ristocetin addition (von Willebrand cofactor) showed that both curves differed significantly at the time point of seven seconds after platelet initiation (p = 0.0287, n knock out = 16, n wild type = 15; Fig. 6). Annexin A7 deficient platelets showed a slightly lowered aggregation velocity. When we compared the aggregation curves of human platelets from a healthy donor with the ones obtained from an individual with a von Willebrand factor type 1 defect, we found that the difference in the curves was much more pronounced as observed in our studies of healthy mouse platelets and anxA7-/-platelets. Furthermore we found that murine platelets responded immediately to the initiating chemical whereas human platelets have a lag phase [23].
12925238	Annexin A7 is thought to have a role in vesicle fusion and in regulating and stabilizing membrane domains [1]. The protein has been localized to the plasma membrane including raft subdomains, furthermore it is present in the cytosol where it is found on subcellular vesicle-like structures. This distribution appears to be independent of the tissue or <andsystem-candidate> type analysed. In specialized or terminally differentiated cells, expression levels increase and frequently the larger of the two isoforms is being expressed [6,34,35].
12925238	Having an annexin A7 knockout mouse we tested the involvement of annexin A7 in budding of red blood <andsystem-candidate> vesicles. Our data suggest that the efficiency of micro- and nanovesicle formation is not significantly different in wild type and mutant red blood cells. Likewise, Dictyostelium discoideum cells, in which the single annexin gene was inactivated, were not impaired in processes requiring membrane fusion [[39]; and data unpublished]. It might well be that the observed fusion of phospholipid layers by annexin A7 in the presence of high Ca2+ concentrations may turn out to be an in vitro effect. Similarly, the high abundance of annexin A7 in micro- and nanovesicles might be fortuitous as a significant percentage of the red blood cell membrane, with which annexin A7 associates when the Ca2+ levels rise, appears to be involved in the formation of exovesicles. Furthermore, the distribution of both annexin A7 isoforms in gradients of red blood cells indicates a function which differs from organizing subcellular membranes or membrane pathways. Whereas annexin A2 is tightly associated with endosomes and may have functions in membrane fusion and the endosomal pathway, annexin A7 distributes with plasma membrane raft domains of different types and densities. Interestingly, in vesicles of red blood cells lacking annexin A7 the amount of sorcin is lowered, indicating that its localisation is affected by the loss of annexin A7 or its expression during red blood cell development was reduced.
12925238	The structural basis for the elasticy of red blood cells in circulation are long range molecular functions of the plasma membrane and the membrane associated part of the cytoskeleton [40-43]. Major constituents of the membrane skeleton are spectrin tetramers linked together by short actin filaments and several other proteins covering the entire cytoplasmic surface of the red blood <andsystem-candidate> membrane [44]. Membrane cholesterol diminishes red blood cell haemolysis by the complement complex, whereas depletion of raft cholesterol abrogates association of all raft proteins with no significant effect on areas in the rest of the cell membrane and deformability [45,46].
12925238	The structural basis for the elasticy of red blood cells in circulation are long range molecular functions of the plasma membrane and the membrane associated part of the cytoskeleton [40-43]. Major constituents of the membrane skeleton are spectrin tetramers linked together by short actin filaments and several other proteins covering the entire cytoplasmic surface of the red blood cell membrane [44]. Membrane cholesterol diminishes red blood cell haemolysis by the complement complex, whereas depletion of raft cholesterol abrogates association of all raft proteins with no significant effect on areas in the rest of the <andsystem-candidate> membrane and deformability [45,46].
12925238	Annexin A7 knock out mouse red blood cells show a more flat shape and have a higher osmotic resistance. The presence of annexin A7 may alter the membrane flexibility in that it supports the typical biconcave membrane shape and leads to a lower minimal osmotic resistance. Annexin A7 does not appear to have an influence on plasma membrane integrity itself as the maximal osmotic resistance value stays constant. Ca2+ and membrane skeletal proteins are known to play key roles on the red blood <andsystem-candidate> membrane shape and stability [47]. Annexins have been reported to bind directly to F-actin, we could however exclude such an activity for annexin A7. Nevertheless it might interact with other components and have a role in organizing the membrane cytoskeleton, controlling raft protein associations or influencing the ionic strength of red blood cells on its own or by interfering with other signaling pathways.
12925238	As discussed above annexin A7 could be involved in the cytoplasmic Ca2+ homeostasis. It has been demonstrated that micromolar changes of the intracellular Ca2+ concentration exert a profound effect on the membrane properties that regulate red blood <andsystem-candidate> deformability [48,49]. Furthermore, the intracellular Ca2+ was shown to regulate the membrane stability through modulation of cytoskeletal protein interactions [50]. Ca2+ also induces a transbilayer phospholipid redistribution inducing a shape change of red blood cells [51]. In addition, Ca2+ ions can drive spiculation of the membrane bilayer without involving the cytoskeleton [52].
12925238	In this paper we report the presence of both annexin A7 isoforms in red blood cells where they are abundant in nanovesicles that form upon Ca2+ addition. The proteins are however not required for the vesiculation process. They are also not essential for the formation of specific membrane domains such as lipid rafts, as exogenously added recombinant annexin A7 redistributed to similar positions in a density gradient containing membranes derived from red blood cells of anxA7-/-mice. The observed <andsystem-candidate> shape change of erythrocytes lacking annexin A7 might be due to alterations in the erythrocyte cytoskeleton. As a direct interaction with F-actin was ruled out, this effect might be mediated by annexin's Ca2+-binding activity.
12925238	We performed our studies using well standardized sampling conditions, as differences in the blood sampling site, for example between tail and heart, show large changes in all <andsystem-candidate> type counts. First and second sample draw affect blood measurements, too [22]. Also the genetic background in common laboratory and transgenic mice affects the phenotype. A change from one strain to another may protect mice from effects of the primarily induced genetic defect. For example, BALB/c mice have a significantly increased velocity of platelet aggregation as compared to 129Sv mice, which were used throughout this study [23].
12925238	The subcellular distribution of annexin A7 was addressed according to [24]. Red blood cells were centrifuged and washed in isotonic buffered salt solution, collected in ice cold lysis buffer (20 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, 200 μM CaCl2, 0.25 M sucrose, and proteinase inhibitors (Roche)), homogenized by a loosely fitting dounce homogenizer and additional passages through a 22 gauge needle. A 50 % iodixanol solution was established by mixing Optiprep solution (60 % iodixanol; Sigma) with buffer (120 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, 1.2 mM CaCl2, 0.25 M sucrose). Seven parts of this 50 % iodixanol solution were mixed with thirteen parts of the red blood <andsystem-candidate> solution, generating a gradient solution containing 17.5 % iodixanol. The mixture was filled into a centrifuge tube underlayed by cushions of 30 % and 35 % iodixanol and centrifuged for 3 hours at 270,000 × g in a SW41 Ti swing out rotor (Beckman) to achieve a nearly linear density gradient (approximately 1.06 g/ml to 1.20 g/ml) [24]. Fractions of 0.6 ml were collected from the top of the gradient by a 1 ml syringe without using a needle and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for further use.
12925238	Red blood cells naturally can form hemoglobin containing exovesicles. In vitro these vesicle formation is Ca2+ induced. Freshly collected lithium-heparin anticoagulated blood samples were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 400 × g and 4°C. The erythrocytes were washed five times with 20 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, and 150 mM NaCl (washing buffer). A volume of 500 μl washed red blood cells were combined with 3 ml of vesiculation buffer (20 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2 adjusted to 5 μM Ca2+ ionophore A23187) and incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C. After incubation EDTA was added to the solution to a final concentration of 5 mM and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 400 × g and 4°C. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged for 20 minutes at 15,000 × g and 4°C. The resulting pellet was resuspended in washing buffer and centrifuged at 400 × g again to collect a supernatant enriched with red blood <andsystem-candidate> microvesicles. The supernatant of the 15,000 × g step was further centrifuged for 60 minutes at 100,000 × g and 4°C. The final pellet of this step was resuspended in washing buffer and centrifuged at 15,000 × g again to purify a supernatant enriched in nanovesicles according to [7,20]. The vesicles were assayed for acetylcholine esterase activity and used for further analysis.
12925238	A 30 μl sample of red blood <andsystem-candidate> vesicles was mixed with an equal volume of buffer (20 mM Hepes, pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 % Triton X-100), vortexed and incubated for 5 minutes at 37°C. Subsequently 640 μl sodium phosphate buffer (100 mM Na2PO4, pH 7.6), 50 μl DTNB (5,5'-dithiobis-(2-nitrobenzoic acid), 10 mM in sodium phosphate buffer), and 50 μl acetylthiocholine chloride (12,5 mM in H2O) were added. The reaction took place at room temperature and was measured photometrically at a wavelength of 405 nm according to the Ellmann' method [25].
12925238	For standard haematopoetic measurements and <andsystem-candidate> counts on murine and human blood samples about 300 μl of blood were analysed with an ADVIA 120 electronic cell counter (Bayer). With this equipment red blood cells and platelets are "transformed" into spherical bodies without changing their volume. Therefore number and volume of red blood cells and platelets are not calculated values, but directly measured values. The following data were statistically analysed: leucocytes, red blood cells, haemoglobin, haematocrit, mean cellular volume, mean cellular haemoglobin, mean cellular haemoglobin concentration, platelet number, neutrophiles, lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophiles, basophiles.
12925238	CH and CSC planned and carried out the experiments with the red blood cells and platelets and the fractionation studies and drafted the manuscript, GL was responsible for platelets, RK gave support on the ADVIA 120 <andsystem-candidate> counter, evaluated and discussed the results, SMP and BSG gave support on the APACT system, platelet aggregation experiments, and evaluated the results, CZ was responsible for the sorcin studies, MS studied the cytoskeletal activities of the protein, AAN conceived of the studies and participated in its design. All authors read and approved the manuscript.
15320950	Pendrin was found in the cochlea in apical membranes of spiral prominence cells and spindle-shaped cells of stria vascularis, in outer sulcus and root cells. Endolymph volume in Slc26a4-/- mice was increased and tissue masses in areas normally occupied by type I and II fibrocytes were reduced. Slc26a4-/- mice lacked the endocochlear potential, which is generated across the basal <andsystem-candidate> barrier by the K+ channel KCNJ10 localized in intermediate cells. Stria vascularis was hyperpigmented, suggesting unalleviated free radical damage. The basal cell barrier appeared intact; intermediate cells and KCNJ10 mRNA were present but KCNJ10 protein was absent. Endolymphatic K+ concentrations were normal and membrane proteins necessary for K+ secretion were present, including the K+ channel KCNQ1 and KCNE1, Na+/2Cl-/K+ cotransporter SLC12A2 and the gap junction GJB2.
15320950	The endocochlear potential and the endolymphatic and perilymphatic K+ concentrations were measured in young adult mice (1–4 month of age) that either have (Slc26a4+/+) or lack (Slc26a4-/-) a functional gene for pendrin [14]. The mouse strain 129Sv/Ev (Taconic, Germantown, NY) was chosen as the source of Slc26a4+/+ controls, since Slc26a4-/- mice were propagated in the this strain and generated using a stem <andsystem-candidate> line derived from 129Sv/Ev. Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- were agouti. They did not differ in coat color. Differences in pigmentation were verified using coisogenic age-matched Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- that were bred in parallel.
15320950	The onset of pendrin expression during development of the mouse inner ear has been determined to be embryonic day (ED) 13 [14]. Morphologically detectable differences in the inner ears of Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- mice become evident as early as ED 15, when Slc26a4-/- mice start to develop an enlarged endolymphatic space that persists into adulthood [14]. Interestingly, sensory hair cells in the cochlea appear normal until postnatal day (PD) 7 but show clear evidence of degeneration by PD 15 [14]. These observations suggest that the cochlear environment supports the survival of sensory hair cells in spite of the enlargement of the endolymphatic duct. A normal endolymphatic K+ concentration, which is critical for hair <andsystem-candidate> survival [20], is established at PD 3 [21] and may persist in Slc26a4-/- at least until PD 7. The time period between PD 7 and 15 is the time when the endocochlear potential develops at the onset of hearing [22]. We hypothesized that a lack of a normal endocochlear potential or an alteration of the endolymphatic K+ concentration could account for deafness in Slc26a4-/- mice. Measurements revealed that the endocochlear potential was absent but that the endolymphatic K+ concentration was normal in adult Slc26a4-/- (Fig. 2a). No significant differences between Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- mice were found in perilymphatic (Fig. 2a) or plasma K+ concentrations (Slc26a4+/+, 4.9 ± 0.3 mM, n = 6; Slc26a4-/-, 5.1 ± 0.3 mM, n = 6). These observations suggest that a primary event leading to deafness in Slc26a4-/- mice, and potentially in patients suffering from Pendred syndrome, is the loss of the endocochlear potential. Degeneration of hair cells is probably a response to the loss of the endocochlear potential.
15320950	The endocochlear potential is generated by stria vascularis in the lateral wall of the cochlea [17,23]. The potential is generated across the basal <andsystem-candidate> barrier of stria vascularis by the K+ channel KCNJ10 located in intermediate cells [24], which are connected to basal cells by a high density of gap junctions [25]. Marginal cells of stria vascularis, which form the barrier toward endolymph, transport K+ from the intrastrial space into endolymph and keep the K+ concentration low adjacent to the KCNJ10 K+ channel [26]. To determine the cause of the loss of the endocochlear potential in Slc26a4-/- mice, we first determined whether intermediate cells are present in stria vascularis, since a loss of intermediate cells is known to lead to a loss of the endocochlear potential [27,28]. Intermediate cells of stria vascularis were visualized by their pigmentation. Pigmentation was present in stria vascularis of Slc26a4-/- mice (Fig. 2b), which suggests that intermediate cells are present. Interestingly, pigmentation of stria vascularis was much stronger in Slc26a4-/- than in Slc26a4+/+ mice.
15320950	Analysis of marginal and basal <andsystem-candidate> barriers by in Slc26a4-/- mice. Tight junctions were visualized by F actin. Whole-mounts of stria vascularis were viewed either from the basal cell side (a-f) or from the marginal cell side (g-l). Bright field images verify that the same area was viewed from either side (b and h). Colored bright field images were mixed with images of F actin staining to indicate the position of pigment granules (d, j, f and l). Focus was varied to either visualize the marginal cell barrier (SMC, c-d and i-j) or the basal cell barrier (BC, e-f and k-l). Both the marginal cell (e-f) and the basal cell barrier (i-f) appeared to be intact. It was critical for this finding that pigmentation did not block the path of the laser. Blockage of the laser by pigmentation produces the untrue impression of a discontinuous marginal cell barrier (c-d) or basal cell barrier (k-l). Comparison of images is aided by marking a significant area with a star. Bars = 10 μm.
15320950	Analysis of marginal and basal <andsystem-candidate> barriers in Slc26a4+/+ and Slc26a4-/- mice. Tight junctions were visualized by F actin in whole-mounts of stria vascularis. Bright field images were taken to evaluate pigmentation (a, d and g). Note the intact marginal cell (b) and basal cell (c) barriers in Slc26a4+/+ mice. Minimal pigmentation of Slc26a4+/+ mice did not compromise F actin localization. Whole-mounts of stria vascularis from Slc26a4-/- mice were viewed either from the basal cell side (e-f) or from the marginal cell side (h-i). Bright field images verify that the same area was viewed from either side (d and g). Focus was varied to either visualize the marginal cell barrier (SMC, b,e and h) or the basal cell barrier (BC, c,f and i). Both the basal cell (f) and the marginal cell (h) barriers appeared to be intact. Blockage of the laser by pigmentation produces the untrue impression of 'holes' in the marginal cell barrier (e) or basal cell barrier (i). Comparison of images is aided by marking three significant areas with colored stars. Bars = 10 μm.
15320950	Pendrin-expressing surface epithelial cells in the spiral prominence region are located in an area where basal cells, which are interconnected by tight junctions, form additional tight junctions with surface epithelial cells [29]. A discontinuity of this complex junction in Slc26a4-/- mice would explain the absence of the endocochlear potential. To evaluate the presence of this connection, we determined by confocal immunocytochemistry the expression of ZO-1 and of F-actin, which associate with tight junction complexes. ZO-1 and F-actin expression revealed a continuous layer of basal cells, including a junction of basal cells with surface epithelial cells in Slc26a4-/- mice, as observed in normal mice (Fig. 1c,1d,1e,1f,6,7). These observations make it unlikely that the primary cause of the loss of the endocochlear potential is a compromise in the basal <andsystem-candidate> barrier.
15320950	We described locations of pendrin expression in the cochlea and vestibular labyrinth and detected normal endolymphatic K+ concentrations in spite of an enlargement of this fluid compartment. We found that Slc26a4-/- mice lack the endocochlear potential because they do not express KCNJ10 protein. Intermediate cells protect stria vascularis by converting CO2 to HCO3 - and by detoxifying free radicals (Fig. 9). CO2 and free radicals are generated by the large numbers of mitochondria in the metabolically highly active strial marginal cells. Intermediate cells employ carbonic anhydrase to convert CO2 to HCO3 - [18,19] and catalase to detoxify free radicals. To protect themselves from free radical damage, intermediate cells generate glutathione and melanin pigment [34-37]. It is conceivable that loss of pendrin, which may secrete HCO3 - into endolymph, results in an accumulation of HCO3 - and an alkalinization of the intrastrial spaces. This extracellular alkalinization may enhance free radical stress, since it may inhibit the uptake of cysteine and thereby limit production of the protective glutathione [38]. Support for the hypothesis of enhanced free radical stress comes from the observed hyperpigmentation in mice lacking pendrin. Strial hyperpigmentation has also been observed in other conditions that are associated with free radical stress, such as acoustic trauma [37]. Alterations in the cytosolic pH in conjunction with free radical stress may lead to the loss of KCNJ10 protein expression in strial intermediate cells. Function and expression of other K+ channels has been shown to be controlled by the cytosolic pH and free radicals, which encode the metabolic state of the <andsystem-candidate> [39]. Suppression of the KCNJ10 K+ channel in strial intermediate cells, which is essential for the generation of the endocochlear potential, is probably the direct cause of deafness in Slc26a4-/- mice and patients suffering from Pendred syndrome.
15345036	Ablation of Ptdsr function in mice causes perinatal lethality, growth retardation and a delay in terminal differentiation of the kidney, intestine, liver and lungs during embryogenesis. Moreover, eye development can be severely disturbed, ranging from defects in retinal differentiation to complete unilateral or bilateral absence of eyes. Ptdsr -/- mice with anophthalmia develop novel lesions, with induction of ectopic retinal-pigmented epithelium in nasal cavities. A comprehensive investigation of apoptotic <andsystem-candidate> clearance in vivo and in vitro demonstrated that engulfment of apoptotic cells was normal in Ptdsr knockout mice, but Ptdsr-deficient macrophages were impaired in pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine signaling after stimulation with apoptotic cells or with lipopolysaccharide.
15345036	Ptdsr is essential for the development and differentiation of multiple organs during embryogenesis but not for apoptotic <andsystem-candidate> removal. Ptdsr may thus have a novel, unexpected developmental function as an important differentiation-promoting gene. Moreover, Ptdsr is not required for apoptotic cell clearance by macrophages but seems to be necessary for the regulation of macrophage cytokine responses. These results clearly contradict the current view that the phosphatidylserine receptor primarily functions in apoptotic cell clearance.
15345036	Programmed <andsystem-candidate> death, or apoptosis, is required for the normal development of almost all multicellular organisms and is a physiological mechanism for controlling cell number; as a result, structures that are no longer needed are deleted during development and abnormal cells are eliminated [1,2]. Most of the cells produced during mammalian embryonic development undergo physiological cell death before the end of the perinatal period [3]. Apoptotic cells are removed rapidly and efficiently as intact cells or apoptotic bodies by professional phagocytes or by neighboring cells. This highly regulated process prevents the release of potentially noxious or immunogenic intracellular materials and constitutes the fate of most dying cells throughout the lifespan of an organism [4,5]. Phagocytosis of apoptotic cells is very distinct from other engulfment processes that result, for example, in the clearance of microorganisms, because engulfment of apoptotic cells triggers the secretion of potent anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive mediators, whereas pathogen recognition causes the release of pro-inflammatory signals [6].
15345036	Almost all <andsystem-candidate> types can recognize, respond to, and ingest apoptotic cells by using specific sets of phagocytic receptors that bind to specific ligands on apoptotic cells. Detailed genetic studies in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans have recently yielded evidence that basic phagocytic mechanisms and pathways for the recognition and engulfment of apoptotic cells are highly conserved throughout phylogeny [7,8]. In vertebrates, a number of receptors have been identified that can mediate phagocytosis of apoptotic cells. These include, for example, scavenger receptors and pattern recognition receptors such as CD36, SR-A and CD14, integrins such as the vitronectin receptor αvβ3, and members of the collectin family and their receptors CD91 and calreticulin [9-13]. The individual roles of these molecules in binding, phagocytosis or transduction of anti-inflammatory signals upon apoptotic cell recognition have not been well defined, however [5,6,14]. The importance of efficient mechanisms for apoptotic cell clearance in vivo is supported by the observation that autoimmune responses can be provoked in mice when key molecules for apoptotic cell recognition and uptake are missing. This has been reported for knockout mice lacking the complement protein C1q [15], for mice with a mutation in the tyrosine kinase receptor gene Mer [16] and, more recently, in mice lacking transglutaminase 2 or milk fat globule epidermal growth factor 8 (MFG-E8) [17,18].
15345036	The exposure of the phospholipid phosphatidylserine (PS) in the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane of apoptotic cells has been described as one of the hallmarks of the induction of apoptosis and is considered to be one of the most important signals required for apoptotic <andsystem-candidate> recognition and removal [19]. A number of cell-surface and bridging molecules can interact with exposed PS on apoptotic cells. These include the serum proteins β2-glycoprotein 1 and protein S [20,21], the growth-arrest-specific gene product GAS-6 [22], complement activation products [23], the milk fat globule protein MFG-E8 [24], and annexin I [25]. In most cases the receptors on phagocytes that recognize these PS-bridging molecules have not been defined, but it has been reported that GAS-6 is a ligand for the tyrosine kinase receptor Mer and that MFG-E8 can bind to the vitronectin receptor αvβ3 [16,24]. Other molecules that bind PS with varying specificity are the lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX-1) and the scavenger receptors CD36 and CD68 (for review see [5] and references therein).
15345036	The exposure of the phospholipid phosphatidylserine (PS) in the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane of apoptotic cells has been described as one of the hallmarks of the induction of apoptosis and is considered to be one of the most important signals required for apoptotic cell recognition and removal [19]. A number of <andsystem-candidate>-surface and bridging molecules can interact with exposed PS on apoptotic cells. These include the serum proteins β2-glycoprotein 1 and protein S [20,21], the growth-arrest-specific gene product GAS-6 [22], complement activation products [23], the milk fat globule protein MFG-E8 [24], and annexin I [25]. In most cases the receptors on phagocytes that recognize these PS-bridging molecules have not been defined, but it has been reported that GAS-6 is a ligand for the tyrosine kinase receptor Mer and that MFG-E8 can bind to the vitronectin receptor αvβ3 [16,24]. Other molecules that bind PS with varying specificity are the lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX-1) and the scavenger receptors CD36 and CD68 (for review see [5] and references therein).
15345036	Very recently, Ptdsr has been found in the <andsystem-candidate> nucleus. Its nuclear localization is mediated by five independent nuclear localization signals, each of which alone is capable of targeting Ptdsr to the cell nucleus [29]. Moreover, an additional study performed recently in Hydra showed an exclusively nuclear localization for the Ptdsr protein [30]. Most interestingly, the nuclear localization of Ptdsr in Hydra epithelial cells did not change upon phagocytosis of apoptotic cells. These reports challenge the original hypothesis, according to which Ptdsr is an exclusively transmembrane receptor for apoptotic cell recognition and anti-inflammatory signaling.
15345036	The observed perinatal lethality indicates that Ptdsr plays an important role during development. Analysis by RT-PCR (data not shown) showed that Ptdsr is expressed early in development, because we were able to detect Ptdsr transcripts in ES cells and embryos at all developmental stages. To analyze in more detail the temporal and spatial expression patterns of Ptdsr, and to correlate expression patterns with observed pathological malformations, we made use of a Ptdsr-β-geo gene-trap reporter mouse line generated from a Ptdsr gene-trap ES <andsystem-candidate> clone. This line has an insertion of β-galactosidase in the 3' region of the gene (Figure 2a).
15345036	We next examined the role of Ptdsr in organ development. Serial histological sections of Ptdsr -/- and control embryos were taken to perform a detailed morphological analysis of all organ systems during development. A significant delay in organ and tissue differentiation was observed at E16.5 in lungs, kidneys and intestine. Lungs of control littermates were properly developed with expanding alveoli (Figure 3a). Terminal bronchi and bronchioles were already well developed, and terminally differentiated epithelial cells with cilia on the luminal <andsystem-candidate> surface were present. In contrast, almost no alveoli or bronchioles were present in Ptdsr -/-  lungs, indicating a delay or arrest in lung sacculation and expansion. Instead, we observed an abundance of mesenchyme that appeared highly immature (Figure 3g). A similar delay in tissue differentiation of Ptdsr -/- embryos was found in the kidneys (Figure 3h). Kidneys from Ptdsr+/+  embryos were well developed at E16.5, showing terminally differentiated glomeruli with Bowman's capsule and collecting tubules lined with cuboidal epithelial cells (Figure 3b). In contrast, Ptdsr-deficient kidneys had only primitive glomeruli at E16.5, and collecting tubules were less well-developed. Instead, a large amount of undifferentiated mesenchyme was present in Ptdsr -/- kidneys (Figure 3h). A delay in tissue differentiation was also found in the intestine at this stage of development. Ptdsr -/- embryos displayed improperly developed villi and an underdeveloped or absent submucosa (Figure 3i). In wild-type embryos (Figure 3c), intestinal cellular differentiation was already highly organized, with intramural ganglion cells between the external and internal muscular layers. Such neuronal cells were absent from the intestine of Ptdsr -/- embryos (Figure 3i), however.
15345036	We next examined Ptdsr -/- embryos that displayed unilateral or bilateral absence of eyes (Figure 5a) by serial sectioning of whole embryos. These embryos showed complex malformations of the optical cup, including absence of the lens (Figure 5b). Most surprisingly, we found pigmented epithelial cells in the nasal cavity of all Ptdsr-knockout mice with anophthalmia that were analyzed histopathologically. We could identify black-colored pigmented cells embedded in the epithelium of the maxillary sinus that resembled presumptive retinal-pigmented epithelium (Figure 5b,c). Examination of consecutive serial sections revealed the formation of a primitive eye structure, with induction and subsequent proliferation of ectopic mesenchymal tissue immediately adjacent to the displaced pigmented epithelium (Figure 5d). This structure was clearly induced ectopically, and we failed to identify similar changes in any of the wild-type embryos. In summary, we observed a wide range of ocular malformations in Ptdsr-deficient mice that ranged from differentiation defects in retinal <andsystem-candidate> layers (for example, the inner granular layer) in mildly affected homozygotes to anophthalmia in severely affected Ptdsr -/- mice that was associated with induction of ectopic eye structures in nasal cavities.
15345036	We next tested whether Ptdsr is functionally required for the clearance of apoptotic cells. We started with an investigation of <andsystem-candidate> death in vivo in the interdigital areas of the developing limbs. Apoptosis of interdigital cells in the distal mesenchyme of limb buds occurs most prominently from developmental stages E12.0 to E13.5 and can be easily examined in situ by whole-mount terminal deoxynucleotide transferase-mediated UTP end-labeling (TUNEL). We compared the pattern of interdigital cell death in fore and hind limb buds from Ptdsr -/- (n = 3) and Ptdsr +/+ (n = 3) mice at E12.5 and E13.5. No differences in accumulation of TUNEL-positive cell corpses were observed between the two genotypes (Figure 6a). The kinetics of cell death occurrence and regression of the interdigital web was similar in wild-type and mutant littermates, providing no evidence that Ptdsr-deficiency is associated with impaired clearance of apoptotic interdigital cells during limb development.
15345036	To investigate further whether removal of apoptotic cells is impaired in Ptdsr -/- mice, we stained immunohistochemically for activated caspase 3 (aCasp3) and analyzed additional organs and tissues where apoptosis plays a crucial role in tissue remodeling during development. Starting at E12.5, we analyzed and compared the number and distribution of aCasp3-positive cells in over 140 serial sections of three wild-type and six Ptdsr -/- embryos in consecutive and corresponding sections. The sagittal sections were separated by 5 μm, allowing a detailed analysis of apoptosis in several organs and tissues. Tissue restructuring by programmed <andsystem-candidate> death occurred most notably within the ventral part of the neural tube (Figure 6b,f) and in the developing paravertebral ganglia (Figure 6d,h) with many apoptotic cells being present. In these tissues Ptdsr is highly expressed at E12.5 (Figure 2c) but we observed no difference in the number or distribution of apoptotic cells in Ptdsr+/+ and Ptdsr -/- embryos. The same was true for the developing kidney: apoptotic cells were present in Ptdsr+/+ and Ptdsr -/- embryos, in limited numbers, but we failed to detect any differences in the number of apoptotic cells between the genotypes (Figure 6c,6g). Furthermore, when we continued our analysis of apoptotic cell clearance in vivo at E16.5, E17.5 and E18.5 of embryonic development as well as in neonatal mice, the number and distribution of apoptotic cells was similar in both genotypes. As already observed at E12.5, analysis of aCasp3-stained sections of the developing thymus, heart, diaphragm, genital ridge, eyes and retina convincingly showed that there was no impairment in apoptotic cell removal in Ptdsr -/- mice. Moreover, because Li and colleagues [31] reported impaired clearance of dead cells during lung development in Ptdsr-deficient mice, we examined the rate of apoptosis induction and cell clearance in our Ptdsr-knockout mice in the lung. Analysis of aCasp3-stained lung tissue from Ptdsr+/+ and Ptdsr -/- mice at E17.5 and P0 demonstrated that apoptosis was an extremely rare event during lung morphogenesis at this stage. In addition, there were no differences in the number or distribution of apoptotic cells in Ptdsr -/- and Ptdsr +/+ mice. Furthermore, we were unable to detect any evidence of tissue necrosis in lungs from Ptdsr-deficient mice. In contrast to the report of Li et al. [31], we never observed recruitment of neutrophils or other signs of pulmonary inflammation at any stage of development in our Ptdsr-deficient mice.
15345036	To analyze whether macrophages are recruited into areas where apoptosis is prominent during embryogenesis, we stained consecutive serial sections either with the macrophage surface marker F4/80 or with aCasp3. Surprisingly, there was no co-localization of macrophages with apoptotic cells. In virtually all embryonic tissues, apoptotic cells and macrophages were localized in different compartments (Figure 6e,6i; and see also Additional data file 1, Figure S1). This suggests that at this stage of development it is mainly neighboring cells that are involved in removal of apoptotic cells, rather than professional macrophages. In summary, our analysis in vivo did not reveal any impairment in apoptotic <andsystem-candidate> clearance in Ptdsr-deficient embryos during development and further suggests that phagocytosis of apoptotic cells is mainly mediated by non-professional 'bystander' cells.
15345036	To determine whether macrophages from Ptdsr-knockout mice were impaired in the efficacy of apoptotic <andsystem-candidate> uptake in vitro, we performed phagocytosis assays with fetal-liver-derived macrophages (FLDMs) and quantified their phagocytosis rates. Phagocytosis of apoptotic thymocytes was investigated at 60, 90 and 120 minutes after addition of target cells in the absence of serum. Analysis of phagocytosis rates by flow cytometric analysis (FACS) revealed no differences in the efficacy of apoptotic cell uptake between Ptdsr -/- and Ptdsr+/+ macrophages and demonstrated no differences in apoptotic cell engulfment between selected time points (data not shown). To re-examine and further independently validate the result of normal apoptotic cell uptake by Ptdsr -/- macrophages, we performed phagocytosis assays for 60 min and determined the percentage of macrophages that had engulfed apoptotic cells, in a total of at least 300 macrophages counted by fluorescence microscopy. Phagocytosed, 5-carboxytetramethylrhodamine- (TAMRA-) labeled apoptotic cells were identified as being engulfed by inclusion in F4/80-labeled macrophages. Analysis was done independently by three investigators who were not aware of macrophage genotypes (Ptdsr -/- or Ptdsr+/+). Again, no differences were found in the percentage of macrophages that had engulfed apoptotic cells (Figure 7a,c,e) or in the relative number of phagocytosed apoptotic cells per macrophage (phagocytotic index; Figure 7f). Moreover, single Ptdsr -/-macrophages could be identified that had engulfed even more apoptotic target cells than had wild-type macrophages (Figure 7b,d). Thus, Ptdsr-deficient macrophages had a normal ability to ingest apoptotic cells and were not impaired in recognition or phagocytosis of cells that had undergone programmed cell death.
15345036	We investigated the occurrence of programmed <andsystem-candidate> death during lung development in wild-type and Ptdsr-knockout mice throughout embryogenesis (E16.5 to P0). Comparative immunohistochemistry for aCasp3 revealed that apoptosis is a rare event during lung morphogenesis. Furthermore, we failed to detect any differences in the number of apoptotic cells in Ptdsr-knockout and wild-type animals in the rare cases where we could detect apoptotic cells within lung tissues. These findings are contrary to the results reported by Li et al. [31], who suggested that impaired clearance of apoptotic mesenchymal and epithelial cells causes a failure in lung morphogenesis in Ptdsr-deficient mice. In contrast, our findings are in line with the current view on lung development during embryogenesis. Accordingly, formation of the epithelial lung via branching morphogenesis can be subdivided into a series of sequential steps that involve: first, formation of the organ anlage in the form of a placode; second, primary bud formation by placode invagination; third, branch initiation and branch outgrowth; fourth, further reiteration of the branching process; and fifth, terminal differentiation of organ-specific proximal and distal structures [34,35]. In contrast to other invagination processes during embryogenesis, such as mammary gland formation, the lumen of the lungs is expanded by successive branching events, branch outgrowth and elongation, rather than by apoptosis [34,36]. Finally, because the lungs of Ptdsr -/-neonates were almost fully expanded and appeared normal in structure in comparison to wild-type littermates, it is highly unlikely that Ptdsr mutants die of respiratory lung failure. In addition, Li and colleagues [31] demonstrated that surfactant expression is normal in Ptdsr-deficient animals, supporting the idea of normal maturation of surfactant-producing type II alveolar epithelial cells and lung function. Other defects must therefore be responsible for the death of Ptdsr-mutant mice. The frequently observed subcutaneous edema of various extents in Ptdsr-deficient homozygotes gave us a hint that Ptdsr-deficiency and lethality might be associated with cardiovascular problems. Indeed, very recently we have obtained strong evidence that Ptdsr-knockout mice die as a result of defects in heart development that are associated with specific cardiopulmonary malformations; (J.E. Schneider, J.B., S.D. Bamfort, A.D.G., C. Broadbent, K. Clarke, S. Neubauer, A.L. and S. Battacharya, unpublished observations).
15345036	Interestingly, we occasionally observed serious malformations of forebrain and nasal structures in Ptdsr-knockout embryos that were associated with bilateral anophthalmia (see for example the mutant embryo in Figure 1g). This suggests that Ptdsr is involved in the regulation of differentiation processes within forebrain regions, and that ablation of Ptdsr function might secondarily affect early eye formation. Li et al. [31] found smaller lenses in Ptdsr-knockout mice and described the formation of retinal protrusions, although anophthalmia and specific differentiation defects of retinal <andsystem-candidate> layers were not reported in their study. Li et al. proposed [31] that the eye phenotype they observed could be explained by failed removal of apoptotic cells during eye development, but we think that the observed defects are unrelated to a failure of apoptotic cell clearance. A recent comprehensive kinetic analysis of apoptosis induction during mouse retinal development described four major peaks of apoptotic cell death [42]. This study demonstrated that there is an initial phase of cell death during the invagination of the optic cup (E10.5), followed by subsequent waves of apoptosis induction immediately before and after birth (E18.5 to postnatal day P2), and from postnatal days P9 to P10 and P14 to P16 [42]. Thus, besides the formation of the inner and outer layers of the optic cup in early eye development, other major phases of retinal cell apoptosis take place only postnatally and correspond to important periods in the establishment of neuronal connections. Furthermore, cell death during normal retinal development occurs in retinal layers distinct from the inner granular layer where we observed the most pronounced differentiation defects in the Ptdsr -/- mutants described here. Other studies that connect the postnatal elimination of apoptotic photoreceptor cells to Ptdsr-mediated macrophage engulfment [43] should be interpreted with extreme caution as these studies were based on the monoclonal anti-Ptdsr antibody mAb 217G8E9 [26,43] (see below).
15345036	Consistent with the results of Li et al. [31], we found particular brain malformations in our Ptdsr -/- mice. Exencephaly and hyperplastic brain phenotypes were observed at a low penetrance in Ptdsr-mutant mice (less then 4.5% of homozygotes), but these do not resemble to any extent the brain-overgrowth phenotypes of caspase- or Apaf1-knockout mice ([44], and references therein) in that we failed to identify any differences in the number or distribution of apoptotic cells or pyknotic <andsystem-candidate> clusters in the neuroepithelium of Ptdsr -/- and Ptdsr+/+ mice. Thus, reduced cell death or diminished clearance of apoptotic neural progenitor cells is unlikely to be the cause of the brain hyperplasia.
15345036	In summary, our studies demonstrate that Ptdsr is required for normal tissue differentiation, especially during the mid-gestation period when we observed the most severe differentiation delays in several organs of Ptdsr-knockout mice. The multiple defects in tissue differentiation cannot be explained by failure of apoptotic <andsystem-candidate> clearance, as this process is normal in our Ptdsr-knockout line. This result therefore indicates that Ptdsr has a novel, hitherto unexpected, role in promoting tissue maturation and terminal differentiation. Additional studies with conditionally targeted Ptdsr-deficient mice are required to investigate the role of spatial and temporal Ptdsr expression and function during tissue differentiation.
15345036	Our studies demonstrate that Ptdsr is not a primary receptor for the uptake of apoptotic cells. Investigation of apoptotic <andsystem-candidate> clearance in vivo in Ptdsr -/- embryos conclusively showed that removal of apoptotic cells is not compromised by ablation of Ptdsr function. Comparative analysis of ten different tissues and organs in Ptdsr+/+ and Ptdsr -/- animals at several stages of embryonic development and in neonates failed to identify impaired uptake of apoptotic cells at any time during development. Furthermore, phagocytosis assays in vitro demonstrated a completely normal uptake of apoptotic cells by Ptdsr -/- macrophages, with some knockout macrophages showing loads even higher than wild-type of engulfed dead cells. These results are contrary to the expected role of Ptdsr in apoptotic cell clearance and to the reported findings of Li et al. [31] and Kunisaki et al. [32], as well as to a study done with a phosphatidylserine receptor null allele in C. elegans [45]. In previous studies in the mouse, the distribution and amount of apoptotic cells in Ptdsr-knockout and control animals were investigated in only a few tissues and at one [31] or two [32] developmental stages. Li et al. [31] examined lung, midbrain and retina at day E17.5 of gestation and identified apoptotic cells by TUNEL staining. Their findings must be interpreted with caution because remodeling of cellular structures by apoptosis in specific retina layers is known to occur mainly postnatally [42], and apoptosis plays an important physiological role in the maintenance and homeostasis of lung epithelium after birth or in pathological conditions involving pulmonary inflammation and not during lung development [46]. This postnatal role for apoptosis is in accordance with our data, as we rarely observed apoptotic cells in retina or lung tissue throughout embryogenesis in Ptdsr+/+ and Ptdsr -/- mice. Kunisaki et al. [32] analyzed TUNEL-stained sections of liver and thymus at days E13.5 and E16.5 of development in Ptdsr+/- and Ptdsr -/- embryos and found reduced rather than increased numbers of TUNEL-positive cells in Ptdsr-deficient embryos. Using co-localization of TUNEL-positive cells with F4/80-positive macrophages they suggested that Ptdsr -/- embryos exhibited a three-fold increase in the frequency of unphagocytosed TUNEL-positive cells together with a severely reduced number of F4/80-positive cells. These results must be interpreted very carefully, however, as it is technically difficult to unambiguously identify engulfed target cells in individual macrophages in solid tissues by fluorescence microscopy.
15345036	In addition, our data suggest that during embryogenesis, macrophage-mediated clearance of apoptotic cells is not the only - or even the primary - mechanism for the removal of apoptotic cells. In many tissues where programmed <andsystem-candidate> death occurs as a prominent event during embryogenesis, such as remodeling of the genital ridge during gonad morphogenesis and differentiation of the neural tube, we found almost no co-localization of apoptotic cells and macrophages. This indicates that in these cases clearance of apoptotic cells is directly mediated by neighboring 'bystander' cells rather than by macrophages that have been recruited into areas where apoptosis occurs. Obviously these in vivo clearance mechanisms are not compromised by Ptdsr-deficiency in our knockout mutant. This finding is in line with studies in macrophageless Sfpi1-knockout embryos that are deficient for the hematopoietic-lineage-specific transcription factor PU.1. Here, the phagocytosis of apoptotic cells during embryogenesis is taken over by 'stand-in' mesenchymal neighbors [47]. As recognition of phosphatidylserine is thought to be a universal engulfment mechanism for all cells that are able to phagocytose apoptotic cells, it is very striking that apoptotic cell clearance mediated by non-professional bystander cells is also not compromised by Ptdsr-deficiency.
15345036	In contrast to Li et al. [31], we did not observe any impairment in the uptake of apoptotic cells by Ptdsr -/- macrophages in vitro. We performed phagocytosis assays in vitro with fetal-liver-derived macrophages, while in their assays, Li and colleagues used thioglycollate-elicited peritoneal macrophages after adoptive transfer of Ptdsr -/- hematopoietic stem cells. The different results obtained in the two studies are puzzling; they might be due to the use of different macrophage or <andsystem-candidate> populations. We and Kunisaki et al. [32] found that Ptdsr-deficiency is to some extent associated with defects in hematopoiesis. Thus, it seems possible that recruitment and activation/differentiation of macrophages after adoptive transfer and thioglycollate elicitation are affected by Ptdsr-deficiency. We do not think that the different results observed in Ptdsr-knockout mice in a mixed C57BL/6 × 129 background and in a pure C57BL/6J background can be attributed to genetic background effects: comparison of apoptotic cell engulfment efficacies of thioglycollate-elicited macrophages from 129P2/OlaHsd and C57BL/6J mice did not show any differences in apoptotic cell uptake (J.B. and A.L., unpublished observations). Moreover, in contrast to our studies, neither Li et al. [31] nor Kunisaki et al. [32] determined phagocytotic engulfment indexes for Ptdsr-deficient macrophages.
15345036	Most strikingly, the recently published data regarding the genetic ablation or perturbation of phosphatidylserine receptor function in C. elegans are also contradictory. Wang et al. [45] reported that psr-1, the C. elegans homolog of Ptdsr, is important for <andsystem-candidate>-corpse engulfment, whereas psr-1 RNAi studies performed by Arur et al. [25] yielded, in this respect, no phenotype. Moreover, Wang and colleagues hypothesized on the basis of their data that psr-1 might act to transduce an engulfment signal upstream of Ced-2 (Crk II), Ced-5 (Dock 180), Ced-10 (Rac 1) and Ced-12 (Elmo) in one of the two cell-corpse engulfment pathways in the worm [45]. But the loss-of-function phenotype of psr-1 mutants and the complementation phenotypes in overexpressing transgenic worms shown by Wang et al. [45] are rather weak as compared to the classical C. elegans engulfment mutants [8].
15345036	Our results demonstrate that Ptdsr is essential for the differentiation and maturation of multiple tissues during embryogenesis. Ablation of Ptdsr function results in neonatal lethality and severe defects in the morphogenesis of several organs. The developmental malformations cannot be explained by impaired clearance of apoptotic cells, a process that proved to be normal in Ptdsr-deficient mice. This opens up the possibility either that there is an as-yet unknown Ptdsr receptor, which might act as a primary phosphatidylserine recognition receptor, or that recognition of phosphatidylserine and subsequent apoptotic <andsystem-candidate> engulfment and anti-inflammatory signaling are mainly mediated through phosphatidylserine bridging proteins and their cognate receptors. Although Ptdsr -/- macrophages were not impaired in their ability to phagocytose apoptotic cells, they showed reduced cytokine responses after stimulation. Further work will be required to determine the molecular mechanisms of these newly recognized Ptdsr functions during development.
15345036	Bruce4 ES cells were transfected with KpnI-linearized targeting vector and selected with G418. ES-<andsystem-candidate> clones resistant to G418 were isolated and analyzed by Southern blot analysis for homologous recombination events within the Ptdsr locus. Chimeric mice were produced by microinjection of two independent homologous recombinant (Ptdsr+/-) ES cells into BALB/c blastocysts and transfer to pseudopregnant foster mothers followed by development to term. Chimeric males were mated with C57BL/6J females. From the two selected ES-cell clones, one successfully contributed to the germ-line. Germ-line transmission of the mutant allele was verified by PCR and Southern blot of genomic DNA from black coat-color F1 offspring.
15345036	An ES-<andsystem-candidate> line carrying a β-geo gene-trap vector in the Ptdsr locus was identified by searching the BayGenomics database (BayGenomics, San Francisco, USA; [48]) with the full-length Ptdsr cDNA. A single ES-cell line was identified carrying the gene-trap in intron V, between exons V and VI of the Ptdsr gene. Chimeric mice were generated by microinjection into CB20 blastocysts and transfer to pseudopregnant foster mothers. Chimeric males were mated with 129P2/OlaHsd females. Germ-line transmission of the mutant gene-trap allele was verified by expression analysis using β-galactosidase staining and RT-PCR.
15345036	Fetal livers were excised from embryos at E12.5 and E13.5, respectively, washed in PBS and dissociated enzymatically for 60 min at 37°C. The digestion buffer (150 μl per liver) comprised 0.6 U/ml dispase I (Roche), 0.1% collagenase D (Roche), 10 U DNase (Roche), and 20% FCS in PBS. X-Vivo 15 medium (Cambrex, East Rutherford, USA) was added to the resulting <andsystem-candidate> suspension, and after centrifugation (200 × g; 3 min) cells were resuspended in X-Vivo 15 medium supplemented with 50 ng/ml macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and cultured on non-treated tissue-culture dishes at 37°C with 5% CO2. Every second or third day the medium was changed by centrifugation. Following withdrawal of M-CSF on day 6 after excision, adherent cells were cultured for an additional 24-48 h in X-Vivo 15 medium.
15345036	We thank Rudi Balling (GBF Research Center) and Shoumo Bhattacharya (University of Oxford) for many helpful and stimulating discussions. We thank Evi Wollscheid-Lengeling (GBF) for help with harvest of neonatal mice, Ronald Frank (GBF) for providing Ptdsr peptide arrays, Maria Ebel (GBF) for ES <andsystem-candidate> blastocyst injections, Manfred Rohde (GBF) for electron microscopy, Kurt Dittmar (GBF) for help with confocal microscopy and Bastian Pasche (GBF) for critical reading of the manuscript. We thank BayGenomics, a genomic consortium funded by the US National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, for providing the ES cell gene-trap line RRJ099. This work was supported in part by the EU project EUMORPHIA, "Understanding human molecular physiology and pathology through integrated functional genomics in the mouse model" (QLG2-CT-2002-00930).
15345036	Analysis of programmed <andsystem-candidate> death and involvement of macrophages in the removal of apoptotic cells in wild-type and Ptdsr -/-embryos. (a) Whole-mount TUNEL staining (blue) of limb buds from wild-type and Ptdsr -/- embryos at E13.5 show no differences in the amount or localization of apoptotic cells during the beginning regression of the interdigital web. Serial sagittal sections stained for activated caspase 3 (aCasp3; red) in (b-d) wild-type and (f-h) Ptdsr -/- embryos at E12.5 show apoptotic cells in the neural tube (b,f), the mesonephros (c,g) and the developing paravertebral ganglia (d,h). Tissue distribution and total number of apoptotic cells was indistinguishable between genotypes and was confirmed by the comparison of consecutive sections of wild-type and Ptdsr -/-embryos from different developmental stages. Analysis of macrophage numbers and location by F4/80 staining (brown) of consecutive sections in paravertebral ganglia of (e) wild-type and (i) homozygous mutant embryos revealed that macrophages (arrows) are not located close to apoptotic cells during embryonic development. (For comparison, see also Additional data file 1, Figure S1, with the online version of this article). Scale bar, 100 μm.
14609438	Little is known at this time about biologically-relevant substrates of CLN2. Various defects that include truncations and single-site mutations in CLN2 have been found in the genes of patients that display symptoms of late-infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis [17]. One of the symptoms of the disease is the accumulation of an autofluorescent material, ceroid-lipofuscin, in lysosomal storage bodies in various <andsystem-candidate> types, primarily in the nervous system. Since a major component of such bodies appears to be intact subunit c of mitochondrial ATP synthase, this protein has been implicated as a potential biological target of the protease. It has been shown recently that CLN2 can indeed degrade this subunit on its N terminus [18], but the unambiguous proof that this is indeed the most important target is still lacking. CLN2 is capable of processing a number of different angiotensin-derived peptides [19], with the efficiency of cleavage dependent on the length of such peptides. The most efficiently processed peptide consisted of 14 amino acids, with the tripeptide Asp-Arg-Val removed from its N terminus. The model of CLN2 presented here can easily accommodate this peptide on the P side of the substrate-binding site, although the exact mode of binding of the long P' portion of the substrate remains obscure. The observation that an analogous peptide acetylated on its N terminus cannot be processed supports the postulate that the interactions of the N-terminal amino group with the side chain of Asp132 may be the most important feature defining the tripeptidase specificity of CLN2. A number of different tripeptides can be serially processed from glucagon, with their sequences varying widely [20]. Again, however, all of these tripeptides can be easily accommodated in the substrate-binding site of the CLN2 model. Other potentially biologically relevant substrates include cholecystokinin and possibly other neuropeptides [21].
16255782	CEBPG is a truncated CEBP transcription factor [19] and possesses the sequences necessary for DNA binding and heterodimer formation, but lacks the sequences necessary for transactivation [20]. CEBPG forms heterodimers with other CEBP family members and in other tissues this leads to increased [21] or decreased [20] transcription of the regulated gene. CEBPG is known to have stimulatory effect on the IL-6 and IL-8 promoters in B <andsystem-candidate> lines [21], and can also act as a dominant negative regulator of CEBPA and CEBPB in fibroblast and B cell lines [20].
16255782	In this study, E2F1 correlation with DNA repair and antioxidant genes was less than the correlation observed with CEBPG, and the E2F1 correlation was observed in both non-BC individuals as well as BC individuals. The maintained correlation of E2F1 with DNA repair and antioxidant genes in BC individuals suggests that this function is more tightly controlled in the population and does not play a role in determination of risk for BC. E2F1 has previously been reported to regulate transcription of DNA repair enzyme genes in other <andsystem-candidate> types, including primary human fibroblasts and mouse epidermal cells [24,25]. Clearly this would have survival value since DNA repair gene up-regulation in response to E2F1 provides additional DNA repair when the DNA is replicating and is particularly vulnerable to damage.
16255782	1Pack years; 2Non-bronchogenic carcinoma individual; 3White; 4African-American; 5Non-smoker; 6Not available; 7Hispanic; 8Bronchogenic carcinoma individual; 9Non-small <andsystem-candidate> lung cancer; 10Squamous carcinoma; 11Small cell lung cancer; 12Carcinoma-in-situ; 13Adenocarcinoma;14Bronchogenic Cancer, histology not specified; 15Poorly differentiated carcinoma.
16433929	μ-calpain and m-calpain are ubiquitously expressed proteases implicated in cellular migration, <andsystem-candidate> cycle progression, degenerative processes and cell death. These heterodimeric enzymes are composed of distinct catalytic subunits, encoded by Capn1 (μ-calpain) or Capn2 (m-calpain), and a common regulatory subunit encoded by Capn4. Disruption of the mouse Capn4 gene abolished both μ-calpain and m-calpain activity, and resulted in embryonic lethality, thereby suggesting essential roles for one or both of these enzymes during mammalian embryogenesis. Disruption of the Capn1 gene produced viable, fertile mice implying that either m-calpain could compensate for the loss of μ-calpain, or that the loss of m-calpain was responsible for death of Capn4-/- mice.
16433929	Without apriori knowledge of the factors regulating calpain activity or their relevant substrates, elucidation of biological functions for calpains presents a challenge. Research on calpains has linked them with a wide variety of functions including muscle growth, development, degeneration (3), neuronal growth and neurodegeneration [4], <andsystem-candidate> cycle progression [5,6], signal cascades triggered by integrins and growth factors [7], membrane protrusion [8], remodeling of the cytoskeleton and cell migration [9-15], and regulation of cell death via both necrosis and apoptosis [16-22]. To date, the literature suggests a complex interplay between caspases and calpains [23,24] and impact of calpain on cell death pathway components [25]. The lack of highly specific cell-permeable inhibitors of calpains contributes to the challenge of investigating and defining calpain functions in these processes. Although over-expression of calpastatin, the endogenous protein inhibitor of μ- and m-calpain provides an important approach for these efforts, it will not distinguish isoform specific functions [24,26,27]. Some work has suggested isoform specific roles, such as a role for m-calpain in epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced cell motility [28,29] and a role for μ-calpain in interferon-inducible protein 9-induced migration of keratinocytes [28]. A cell permeable calpain inhibitor (which likely inhibits other thiol-proteases as well) has been used to select cells lacking μ-calpain which display reduced proliferation rates [30]. Interestingly, m-calpain expression persisted in these cells, suggesting a possible requirement of m-calpain for cell survival [30].
16433929	Two independent Capn2+/- ES <andsystem-candidate> lines, designated ES27 and ES36, were isolated from a screen of 305 drug-resistant clones. Correct targeting of the Capn2 locus was established both by Southern blot hybridization and PCR analysis. A probe located outside the short (upstream) arm of homology hybridized to a 3.5-kb BamHI fragment of the wild-type allele and 5.3-kb BamHI fragment of the mutant allele as predicted from genomic maps (Figure 2A). The same probe also detected the expected 7.2-kb wild-type and 6.4-kb mutant BglII fragments, 4.9-kb wild-type and 5.7-kb mutant NcoI fragments, as well as 7.2-kb wild-type and 4.9-kb mutant BglII/AgeI fragments (not shown). A probe derived from the PGK-Neo cassette recognized only the 5.3-kb BamHI fragment in Capn2+/- ES cells, suggesting that the targeting vector had integrated solely at the Capn2 locus (not shown). A PCR screening method was also established that generated a wild-type product of 2,749 bp and a 2,711 bp product from the mutant allele. The 2,711 bp product was only evident in the two targeted cell lines (Figure 2B).
16433929	Characterization of targeted ES <andsystem-candidate> lines. (A) Targeted disruption of the Capn2 locus was detected initially by Southern blotting. Membranes were blotted with BamHI-digested genomic DNA extracted from ES cells and hybridized with a DIG-labeled 823 bp BamHI/HindIII fragment located immediately upstream of the short arm of the targeting vector (Figure 1). A 3.5-kb BamHI fragment corresponding to the wild-type allele was present in all cells, whereas a 5.3-kb fragment from the mutant allele was detected in two targeted cell lines, designated ES27 and ES36. (B) PCR genotyping was carried out with two separate reactions designed to amplify either a 2,748 bp segment from the wild-type allele or a 2,711 bp segment from the mutant allele. Both reactions used a common sense primer located in intron 4, outside the short arm of the targeting vector, and distinct allele-specific antisense primers. The reaction to detect the wild-type allele used an antisense primer located in exon 7 while the amplification of the mutant sequence was done with an antisense primer in the PGK-Neo cassette. The results confirm the presence of the wild-type allele in all cells, whereas the mutant allele signal was observed only in the two targeted clones. (M) denotes the molecular weight marker.
16433929	Eight chimeric male mice were produced in morula aggregation experiments using the Capn2+/- ES27 <andsystem-candidate> line. Two of these males transmitted the Capn2+/- ES27 genotype through the germline into the F1 generation. Heterozygous Capn2+/- animals appeared normal, with no obvious defects in gross anatomy, reproduction, or life span.
16433929	Out of 199 weanlings from heterozygous intercrosses, no Capn2-/- progeny were detected (Table 2). We did not observe high rates of perinatal death, and no Capn2-/- stillborns were observed. This suggested that Capn2-/- animals perished at some stage during embryonic development. In an attempt to determine if embryonic death occurred at a post-implantation stage, embryos were harvested for genotyping at different times between E10.5 and E18.5. No Capn2-/- embryos were observed and no signs of embryo resorption were detected (Table 2). This indicated that the Capn2-/- embryos might be dying prior to implantation. Embryos were then flushed from the oviducts of pregnant females at E2.5 or E3.5, and genotyped by means of a nested PCR strategy (Figure 4). Two of 90 successfully genotyped pre-implantation embryos were Capn2-/-, (Table 2; Figure 5). Both of these Capn2-/- embryos were isolated at the 8-<andsystem-candidate> stage and did not display any obvious morphological defects. None of the 46 successfully genotyped blastocyst-staged embryos were Capn2-/-. The scarcity of Capn2-deficient embryos surviving to the 8-cell stage suggested that the loss of m-calpain activity must fatally compromise the viability of early embryos. Furthermore, it is possible that persistence of some maternally derived mRNA transcript or protein might have allowed a small number of Capn2-/- embryos to survive to the morula-stage.
16433929	Genotyping of pre-implantation embryos. A nested PCR strategy was used to genotype embryos prior to implantation as described in Figure 4. Capn2+/- mice were mated and the date of fertilization established by the appearance of vaginal plugs. Blastocyst (E3.5) or 8-<andsystem-candidate> embryos (E2.5) were flushed from the oviducts and then digested with proteinase K. In separate reactions segments found exclusively in either the wild-type or mutant alleles were co-amplified with an internal control sequence, located in the short (upstream) arm of the targeting vector, which is found in both alleles. The final products were 429 bp for the wild-type allele, 389 bp for the mutant allele, and 213 bp for the internal control. (A) A representative example of the genotyping of blastocyst stage embryos. Embryos #1, 2, 4, 5, and 6 were Capn2+/- whereas embryos #3 and #7 were Capn2+/+, denoted by the absence of the 389 bp mutant signal. (B) An example of the genotyping of 8-cell embryos is shown. Embryos #1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 were Capn2+/- while embryo #4 was Capn2-/-, marked by the absence of the 429 bp wild-type signal. (M) denotes the molecular weight marker.
16433929	Capn2+/- ES cells were subjected to clonal selection in the presence of 2 mg/mL G418 in attempts to generate homozygous mutant cells by gene conversion. This procedure has been extensively applied to targeted ES cells and was readily achieved in the case of Capn4+/- ES cells [31]. In this case, however, no Capn2-/- ES cells were isolated in screens of 126 drug-resistant clones. The inability to isolate Capn2-/- ES cells, in concert with the absence of Capn2-/- embryos beyond the 8-<andsystem-candidate> stage, suggested that m-calpain activity might be essential for cell viability or the establishment of viable ES cell clones.
16433929	One of the enduring questions in calpain research has been whether the two ubiquitous isoforms, μ- and m-calpain, possess distinct in vivo roles. The two enzymes share 62% sequence identity and are very similar in their structure and biochemistry. Notably, they cleave essentially the same set of substrates in vitro, suggesting that they have the potential to carry out the same functions in vivo. On the other hand, since they require different amounts of Ca2+ for in vitro activation, it is possible that the two isoforms are differentially regulated inside cells. It is now clear, from the gene targeting work done in mice, that μ- and m-calpain have some distinct physiological roles, at least during embryogenesis. As noted, whereas Capn2 null murine embryos die prior to implantation, homozygous disruption of the μ-calpain large subunit gene, Capn1, did not affect the viability of mice [33]. The principal phenotype observed as a result of Capn1 deficiency involved a disturbance in platelet function, possibly at the level of the tyrosine phosphorylation of certain proteins involved in platelet activation. Both μ- and m-calpain activities are present in most mammalian cells, although the published data, owing to weaknesses in the available methodology, do not provide reliable estimates of their relative amounts. Platelets and erythrocytes contain abundant μ-calpain activity, while m-calpain activity is barely detectable. Compensation for μ-calpain deficiency by m-calpain is therefore less likely in platelets and erythrocytes than in other <andsystem-candidate> types. As a result, it is not possible to determine whether the absence of marked phenotype in Capn1-/- animals is due to a compensatory affect by the remaining m-calpain activity, or whether the functions of μ-calpain are simply not essential. In contrast, lethality in Capn2-/- embryos demonstrates that m-calpain activity is essential for embryonic development beyond the 8-cell stage. It follows that at least some functions of μ-calpain and m-calpain are distinct.
16433929	The underlying cause of the preimplantation lethality in Capn2-/- embryos has not yet been clarified. The two homozygous null embryos identified at the 8-<andsystem-candidate> stage did not present any obvious morphological defects. However, the fact that only two out of 90 successfully genotyped pre-implantation embryos proved to be Capn2-/- is in itself revealing. Preimplantation lethality resulting from gene knockouts can typically be attributed to two general causes. In some cases, defects are incurred in the embryonic differentiation program which can often be observed morphologically [38]. Null embryos of this type often survive beyond the morula stage, and a Mendelian distribution of embryonic genotypes is usually noted. In other cases, however, the gene disruption is thought to compromise fatally the viability of cells in the early embryo [3,39-43]. In these instances, only a few null embryos are ever observed and homozygous mutant ES cells could not be isolated. The Capn2 knockout fits into the latter category. If it is true that m-calpain is essential for some aspect of cell viability, the survival of a few Capn2-/- embryos to the 8-cell stage is most likely due to the persistence of some maternal m-calpain mRNA and/or protein through 2–3 cell divisions.
16433929	The mechanistic reasons for lethality in the absence of m-calpain are still unclear. There have been several reports of m-calpain involvement in <andsystem-candidate> proliferation in certain circumstances, including reports of its involvement in chromosome segregation during mitosis [44] as well as during meiosis [45]. Defects in migration, reported in Capn4-/- cells [9], could contribute to failed embryonic development. The association between calpain and cell viability has been noted in Capn4-/- MEFs and other cell lines, although the reported work frequently did not distinguish between μ- and m-calpain, and did not show that calpain was strictly essential [5,6]. In both CHO cells and Capn4-/- MEFs, calpain was shown to influence cell proliferation, but only at very low cell densities [5]. Calpain has also been associated with progression through the G1 stage of the cell cycle [6]. Furthermore, some of the proteins known to be involved in cell cycle progression, such as p53, p107, cyclin D1, and p27kip1 are reputed to be calpain substrates [3].
16433929	It should also be stressed that Capn4-/- ES and MEF cells from the presumptive hypomorphic allele can be maintained in culture despite an apparent lack of calpain activity, as assessed by casein zymography or by the appearance of characteristic spectrin breakdown products. It is conceivable, as discussed earlier, that a trace amount of calpain activity, beneath levels detectable by these methods, is retained from this mutant Capn4 allele, and it is sufficient for maintaining the viability of the cells. Furthermore, calpain-independent mechanisms for protecting <andsystem-candidate> viability might exist in these cell lines that are absent in early embryonic cells.
16433929	The repeated failure to achieve gene conversion of Capn2+/- to Capn2-/- ES cells by selection of clones in high concentrations of G418 suggests that the homozygous mutant state somehow compromises <andsystem-candidate> viability or clonal selection of ES cells. Efforts are under way to express the m-80 k subunit from a Capn2 cDNA rescue transgene prior to gene conversion in order to preemptively rescue m-calpain activity before the remaining endogenous wild-type allele is lost. However, difficulty in achieving stable expression of the rescue transgene has thus far hampered these attempts.
16433929	Mouse R1 ES cells [49] were maintained on gelatin-coated plates with feeder layers of mouse embryonic fibroblasts at 37°C under 5% CO2 in ES <andsystem-candidate> medium (DMEM [high glucose] supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum, 0.1 mM non-essential amino acids, 2 mM glutamine, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 0.1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin, 25 μg/ml amphotericin, and 1,000 U/ml of ESGro [Chemicon]). Fetal bovine serum from HyClone Laboratories Inc (Logan, Utah) was tested for its ability to support ES cell growth. Gelatin was from Sigma-Aldrich Canada (Oakville, Ontario). Unless otherwise specified, all other tissue culture reagents were from Gibco-BRL.
16433929	Capn2+/- ES cells were aggregated overnight with 8-<andsystem-candidate> embryos recovered from CD1 matings, as previously described [31]. On the next day, blastocysts were transferred to pseudopregnant CD1 females. Chimeric animals were identifiable at birth by black eye pigmentation and subsequently by patches of agouti coat colour. Chimeric males were bred with CD1 females to identify those males capable of germline transmission. These were then bred with 129SvJ females to establish the mutation in an inbred genetic background. Mouse protocols were approved by the Queen's University Animal Care Committee according to the guidelines of the Canadian Council on Animal Care.
16433929	Time of fertilization was determined by observation of copulation plugs, and noon of that day was defined as E0.5. Pre-implantation embryos were obtained by dissecting the uteri out of pregnant females at E2.5 or E3.5 and flushing the oviducts with ES <andsystem-candidate> medium. Isolated embryos were then digested for five hours at 55°C in 20 μL of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% Triton X-100, 200 μL/mL proteinase K, pH 8.0), followed by ten minutes at 95°C to inactivate the proteinase K. Lysates were then used for PCR genotyping.
16433929	We would like to thank Andras Nagy for providing the R1 ES <andsystem-candidate> line, Janet Rossant for the 129SvJ mouse genomic DNA library, and Ralph Zirngibl for modification of the pPNT vector. Initial cloning of Capn2 and vector construction was undertaken by DEC as a sabbatical visitor at Queen's University with support from the National Science Foundation (MCB9723636) and the University of Maine.
15040800	Sitosterolemia (MIM 210250, also known as phytosterolemia) is a rare autosomal, recessively inherited disorder characterized by elevated blood and tissue plant sterol levels [5]. Affected individuals can develop tendon and/or tuberous xanthomas, hemolytic episodes, arthralgias, arthritis, and premature atherosclerosis [6,7]. Sitosterolemic patients have diagnostically elevated plasma plant sterol levels (for example, sitosterol, campesterol, stigmasterol, and avenosterol, etc.) and their 5-saturated stanol metabolites, particularly sitostanol, with normal or only moderately increased cholesterol levels. Clinical studies have shown that affected individuals hyperabsorb all dietary sterols (thus have lost the ability to restrict the sterol species absorbed) and have lost the ability to excrete sterols into bile [8,9]. Infusion of sitosterol and cholesterol into normal individuals leads to a rapid and preferential excretion of sitosterol into bile, but in sitosterolemic individuals biliary sterol secretion is almost absent [7,9]. Previous studies on sitosterolemia have suggested a defect involving a putative sterol 'transporter' expressed in the intestinal brush border and/or the hepatic canalicular membrane [10,11]. Genetic analyses of sitosterolemia pedigrees allowed the mapping of the STSL locus to human chromosome 2p21, between D2S2294 and D2S2298 [12,13]. By using positional cloning procedures or by screening for genes induced by exposure to LXR agonists, two groups identified not one but two genes, ABCG5 and ABCG8, which encode the proteins sterolin-1 and sterolin-2, mutations of which cause sitosterolemia [14-16]. Interestingly, complete mutation in either ABCG5 alone or ABCG8 alone is not only necessary, but sufficient to cause the disease [14]. To date, no patient with sitosterolemia has been identified with mutations in both genes. Based upon these data, and the similarity of the clinical and biochemical phenotype, sterolin-1 and sterolin-2 are hypothesized to function as obligate heterodimers. This is also supported by the fact that each of these proteins is a 'half-transporter', containing six transmembrane domains, and not the classical 12 transmembrane characteristic of functional ABC transporters. The exact function of these two proteins still remains unknown but recent studies have shown that overexpression of ABCG5/ABCG8 in a transgenic mouse model results in an increased biliary cholesterol concentration and a 50% reduction in the fractional absorption of dietary cholesterol [17]. It has been suggested that ABCG5 and ABCG8 act as mutual chaperones for both maturation and correct apical targeting. Co-expression of both was required for apical trafficking in a polarized <andsystem-candidate> line, as well in vivo using Abcg5/Abcg8 double-knockout mice [18,19]. However, no functional assay has yet been developed to demonstrate whether or not the two half-transporters function as homo- or heterodimers and whether they selectively pump sterols. Likewise, the cellular localization of these two proteins has yet to be shown in a model deficient in either Abcg5 or Abcg8 alone. A mouse model disrupting both Abcg5 and Abcg8 simultaneously results in a phenotype similar to that of the human disease [20]. However, it is important to point out that the human disease is caused by complete mutation in one or the other gene, but not both simultaneously.
15040800	A mouse genomic bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) library (CitbCJ7, ES <andsystem-candidate> line/129Sv, Research Genetics, Inc., Huntsville, AL, USA) was screened by using primers designed from the sequences of mouse Abcg5 and Abcg8 cDNA as previously reported [21]. A positive BAC clone was used as a template to amplify genomic DNA fragments of Abcg8. Long-fragment polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed using Expanded Long Template PCR system kit (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IA, USA). An approximately 4.5 kb 'long-arm' genomic fragment containing partial exon 1 to partial exon 3 was inserted into the Pml I restriction-cloning site A of OSDUPDEL vector. The 'short-arm' genomic fragment, containing partial exon 4 to partial exon 6, was cloned into the Not I-Kpn I of cloning site B. Homologous targeting would result in complete intron 3, partial exon 3 and partial exon 4 replacement by the neomycin-resistance cassette, resulting in the disruption of the ABC Walker A motif (Figure 1a).
15040800	ES cells (129/SvEvTac-<andsystem-candidate> line) were electroporated with the linearized targeting vector DNA and cultured on sub-confluent embryonic fibroblasts. Transfected cell colonies were selected by culturing cells in medium containing 200 μg/mL G418 (Life Technologies, Rockville, MD, USA). The ES cells were screened for homologous recombination by PCR with the forward primer, neoF (5'-GGGTCGTTTGTTCGGATCAA-3') from neo cassette, and reverse primer intron 6R (5'-ACCAGTTGGTCCTAGCTCGA-3'), which is located outside the targeting construct in mouse Abcg8 intron 6. Positively targeted ES cell clones were confirmed by Southern blotting, using ES cell DNA digested by BamHI and a probe comprising of a 562 bp PCR fragment from partial intron 2 and exon 3 of Abcg8 gene.
15040800	The targeting construct (Figure 1a) results in the potential disruption of normal splicing, as well as loss of some coding sequences involving exons 3 and 4. After ES <andsystem-candidate> electroporation with the linearized targeted plasmid DNA, two homologous recombinant ES clones (out of 58 ES clones screened) were identified. Blastocyst injection of these resulted in five highly chimeric mice (three males, two females). One male and one female, both from the same ES clone, showed germline transmission and the female line was used to establish a multi-generational colony bred onto a C57Bl/6J background.
15040800	We, as well as others, have proposed Abcg5/sterolin-1 and Abcg8/sterolin-2 to function as obligate heterodimers. Thus knocking out Abcg8/sterolin-2 alone is equivalent to a functional loss of both sterolins. It has been shown that Abcg8/sterolin-2 expression is required for correct apical trafficking of Abcg5/sterolin-1 to the apical surface in a polarized <andsystem-candidate> line and more recently in vivo by over-expression experiments [18,19]. In experiments shown here, using three separately developed anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 antibodies, we have obtained inconsistent data regarding the trafficking of Abcg5/sterolin-1 in Abcg8-/- mice. Based upon classical N-glycosylation maturation it would appear that Abcg5/sterolin-1, in the Abcg8-/- mice, does not exit the endoplasmic reticulum. However, by immunohistochemistry it appears that Abcg5/sterolin-1 is apically expressed in the Abcg8-deficient mice regardless of the anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 antibody used. Interestingly, in a report of Abcg5/Abcg8 localization in canine gallbladder epithelial cells, these two proteins were found intracellularly under baseline conditions [44]. But when given liver X receptor alpha (LXRα) agonist, Abcg5/sterolin-1 and Abcg8/sterolin-2 appeared to be expressed at the apical surface. In these studies the UTSW anti-Abcg5/sterolin-1 antibody was used. It is apparent with these conflicting data that the trafficking of these transporters is not as clear-cut. In a recent paper, Mangrivite et al. showed that the apical sorting of rat SPNT in polarized renal epithelial cells was independent of N-glycosylation [45]. Therefore, at this time, we can neither exclude the possibility that Abcg5/sterolin-1 expression is functional in our Abcg8/sterolin-2 deficient mice nor can we rule it out. We have no functional assay for these proteins at present. More extensive fractionation experiments are underway to better determine the exact compartmental location of Abcg5/sterolin-1 in the Abcg8-/- mice. In this context, Plösch et al. have described an Abcg5/sterolin-1 deficient mouse that maintains the ability to secrete biliary cholesterol to the same extent as the wild-type mice and, when fed a LXR agonist, had higher Abcg8 mRNA expression and tended to secrete more biliary cholesterol than wild-type mice [46]. It has been argued that Abcg5/sterolin-1 and Abcg8/sterolin-2 are dependent upon each other for secretion of hepatic sterols into bile [19]. Given the data presented here and from the Abcg5-deficient mouse this does not appear to be the case. Perhaps in the previously published model a non-physiologic state has been made that generates these data. Taken together, these animal models suggest that Abcg5/sterolin-1 and Abcg8/sterolin-2 have independent function in vivo or that there are proteins other than the sterolins that can secrete biliary sterols.
17425782	Each mutation deleted >80% of the coding sequence, including the critical PHD domain, and almost certainly resulted in null function. Pygo2 homozygous mutants, with rare exception, died shortly after birth, with a phenotype including lens agenesis, growth retardation, altered kidney development, and in some cases exencephaly and cleft palate. Pygo1 homozygous mutants, however, were viable and fertile, with no detectable developmental defects. Double Pygo1/Pygo2 homozygous mutants showed no apparent synergy in phenotype severity. The BAT-gal transgene reporter of canonical Wnt signaling showed reduced levels of expression in Pygo1-/-/Pygo2-/- mutants, with tissue-specific variation in degree of diminution. The Pygo1 and Pygo2 genes both showed widespread expression in the developing kidney, with raised levels in the stromal <andsystem-candidate> compartment. Confocal analysis of the double mutant kidneys showed disturbance of both the ureteric bud and metanephric mesenchyme-derived compartments. Branching morphogenesis of the ureteric bud was altered, with expanded tips and reduced tip density, probably contributing to the smaller size of the mutant kidney. In addition, there was an expansion of the zone of condensed mesenchyme capping the ureteric bud. Nephron formation, however, proceeded normally. Microarray analysis showed changed expression of several genes, including Cxcl13, Slc5a2, Klk5, Ren2 and Timeless, which represent candidate Wnt targets in kidney development.
17425782	Wnt signaling is of critical importance in several stages of kidney development. Mutual inductive interactions between the ureteric bud and metanephric mesenchyme drive nephrogenesis [1]. The ureteric bud synthesizes Wnt9b, which is essential for induction of the mesenchyme to form nephrons [2]. Wnt4 is made by the induced metanephric mesenchyme and is also required for nephrogenesis [3]. Furthermore, Wnt11, secreted by the ureteric bud tips, participates in a positive feedback loop promoting glial <andsystem-candidate> line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) expression by the metanephric mesenchyme [4]. Mutations in Wnt9b or Wnt4 result in a dramatic block in nephron formation, while Wnt11 mutants show a significant reduction in nephron number. It is interesting to note that Wnt4 and Wnt11 have been shown to signal, at least in some cases, through noncanonical pathways [5-7], while there is evidence indicating that Wnt9b activates canonical Wnt signaling in the kidney [2].
17425782	Pygo1 and Pygo2 expression in the E18.5 developing kidney. Immunofluorescence was used to determine expression patterns of the Pygo1 and Pygo2 proteins in the cortex of the E18.5 kidney. Both Pygo1 and Pygo2 (red) were localized in the nucleus, as expected. Both genes showed widespread expression, with signal detected in all components of the developing kidney, but with elevated levels in the stromal <andsystem-candidate> compartment (arrows). Epithelial cells, primarily ureteric bud in these sections, were labeled blue using E-cadherin antibody. Original magnification × 200.
17425782	In conclusion, the mammalian Pygo2 gene is required for normal branching morphogenesis of the ureteric bud, with mutants showing dilated tips and reduced numbers of tips. In addition, in Pygo2 mutants there was an expansion of the zone of metanephric mesenchyme that caps the ureteric buds. Nevertheless, nephron formation proceeded remarkably normally, even in Pygo1/Pygo2 double-homozygous mutants. This was surprising considering the importance of the Pygopus gene in canonical Wnt signaling in Drosophila, and the importance of canonical Wnt signaling in nephrogenesis. The results argue that the mammalian Pygopus genes are, in most developing systems, only quantitative transducers of Wnt signaling. Previous <andsystem-candidate> culture studies [32,33] and the reduced BAT-gal transgene reporter expression in the Pygo1/Pygo2 knockout mice described in this report, do confirm an evolutionarily conserved function in canonical Wnt signaling. In mammals, however, the phenotypic effects of Pygopus mutation are much milder than in Drosophila. The degree of importance of the Pyg1/2 genes in Wnt signaling was context-dependent, but in general, mammalian organogenesis remained intact in Pygopus mutants. Perhaps the simplest explanation is that in mammals, other genes show partial functional redundancy with the two Pygopus genes. The β-catenin transcription-factor complex includes a large and growing number of proteins , some of which may share the nuclear localization and/or transcription activation functions of Pygo1/Pygo2 in mammals. The identities and roles of these Pygopus redundant genes remain to be determined.
17425782	Pygo1 and Pygo2 genes were each targeted by flanking the critical coding regions of the third exon containing the PHD motif with LoxP sequences. Targeting constructs were made using the Flp/Cre vector previously described [34], which carries a neomycin-resistance gene flanked by FRT sequences, and three unique restriction sites for subcloning the two blocks of homology for driving recombination, and the critical region to be flanked by LoxP sequences. For each construct, the three genomic segments required for subcloning were made by PCR from RI ES <andsystem-candidate> DNA. The resulting targeting constructs were confirmed by sequencing.
15676071	In addition to their importance as a locus of disease, photoreceptor cells serve as an excellent model for studies in neuronal differentiation. Photoreceptor cells are highly polarized. At their <andsystem-candidate>, these neurons have a membranous outer segment, which contains proteins involved in the phototransduction cascade. Loss of function mutations in rhodopsin [29], or the structural protein, peripherin [30], result in an inability to form outer segments. At the other extremity, photoreceptors terminate with synaptic endings that make contact with the processes of horizontal and bipolar cells [31,32]. Rod spherules establish an invaginating synapse with rod bipolar dendrites and axonal endings of horizontal cells. This synapse is characterized by the presence of a ribbon in the presynaptic cytoplasm. Cone pedicles make invaginating synapses with the dendrites of on-cone bipolar cells and horizontal cells and basal junctions with the dendrites of off-cone bipolar cells. The factors regulating the formation of the photoreceptor synapses are completely unknown. At least one photoreceptor synaptic protein, HRG4, contains a potential Crx target sequence in its transcriptional regulatory sequence [33].
15676071	Transmission electron microscopy of the outer retina at P21 in (A) Crx+/+ and (B) Crx-/- retinas. pe, pigmented epithelium. <andsystem-candidate>, outer segments. is, inner segments. onl, outer nuclear layer with photoreceptor nuclei. Scale bar = 5 μm for A and B.
15676071	Transmission electron microscopy of the outer retina at P21 in (A) Crx+/+ and (B) Crx-/- retinas. pe, pigmented epithelium. os, outer segments. <andsystem-candidate>, inner segments. onl, outer nuclear layer with photoreceptor nuclei. Scale bar = 5 μm for A and B.
15676071	Transmission electron micrograph of the outer segment layer of Crx-/- retina at P21. Inner segments of Crx-/- photoreceptors exhibit numerous mitochondria (<andsystem-candidate> indicated by arrow) as in Crx+/+ (Figure 1A). pe, pigmented epithelium. is, inner segments. onl, outer nuclear layer. Scale bar = 2 μm.
15676071	Transmission electron micrograph of the outer segment layer of Crx-/- retina at P21. Inner segments of Crx-/- photoreceptors exhibit numerous mitochondria (m indicated by arrow) as in Crx+/+ (Figure 1A). pe, pigmented epithelium. <andsystem-candidate>, inner segments. onl, outer nuclear layer. Scale bar = 2 μm.
15676071	Transmission electron micrograph of Crx-/- retina at P21 (A and B), and scanning electron micrograph of Crx-/- at P10 (C) of outer segment layer. (A) Evidence of ciliogenesis in the photoreceptor layer of Crx-/- retina. Nonmotile connecting cilia were observed in cross section (arrowheads 1,2, and 3, for examples). Connecting cilium 1 (arrowhead 1) demonstrated seven microtuble doublets, while cilium 2 and cilium 3 exhibited nine. In A, a displaced <andsystem-candidate> nucleus (n) appearing pyknotic and abnormal deposition of matrix (mx) material of unknown identity were seen, along with large amounts of membranous vesicles (arrow) which filled the photoreceptor space and appeared to be released from inner segments. Scale bar = 3.7 μm. (B) Nonmotile connecting cilium in cross section, from a Crx-/- photoreceptor, demonstrating characteristic 9+0 radial array of microtubule doublets. Scale bar = 88 nm. (C) Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of membranous vesicles (arrow shows one example) shed from inner segments of Crx-/- photoreceptors at P10. Figure shows inner segments viewed from the scleral side with the pigmented epithelium removed. Scale bar = 1 μm.
15676071	Transmission electron micrograph of Crx-/- retina at P21 (A and B), and scanning electron micrograph of Crx-/- at P10 (C) of outer segment layer. (A) Evidence of ciliogenesis in the photoreceptor layer of Crx-/- retina. Nonmotile connecting cilia were observed in cross section (arrowheads 1,2, and 3, for examples). Connecting cilium 1 (arrowhead 1) demonstrated seven microtuble doublets, while cilium 2 and cilium 3 exhibited nine. In A, a displaced cell nucleus (<andsystem-candidate>) appearing pyknotic and abnormal deposition of matrix (mx) material of unknown identity were seen, along with large amounts of membranous vesicles (arrow) which filled the photoreceptor space and appeared to be released from inner segments. Scale bar = 3.7 μm. (B) Nonmotile connecting cilium in cross section, from a Crx-/- photoreceptor, demonstrating characteristic 9+0 radial array of microtubule doublets. Scale bar = 88 nm. (C) Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of membranous vesicles (arrow shows one example) shed from inner segments of Crx-/- photoreceptors at P10. Figure shows inner segments viewed from the scleral side with the pigmented epithelium removed. Scale bar = 1 μm.
15676071	Transmission electron micrograph of Crx-/- retina at P21 (A and B), and scanning electron micrograph of Crx-/- at P10 (C) of outer segment layer. (A) Evidence of ciliogenesis in the photoreceptor layer of Crx-/- retina. Nonmotile connecting cilia were observed in cross section (arrowheads 1,2, and 3, for examples). Connecting cilium 1 (arrowhead 1) demonstrated seven microtuble doublets, while cilium 2 and cilium 3 exhibited nine. In A, a displaced cell nucleus (n) appearing pyknotic and abnormal deposition of matrix (<andsystem-candidate>) material of unknown identity were seen, along with large amounts of membranous vesicles (arrow) which filled the photoreceptor space and appeared to be released from inner segments. Scale bar = 3.7 μm. (B) Nonmotile connecting cilium in cross section, from a Crx-/- photoreceptor, demonstrating characteristic 9+0 radial array of microtubule doublets. Scale bar = 88 nm. (C) Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of membranous vesicles (arrow shows one example) shed from inner segments of Crx-/- photoreceptors at P10. Figure shows inner segments viewed from the scleral side with the pigmented epithelium removed. Scale bar = 1 μm.
15676071	In order to characterize further the morphogenesis of Crx-/- photoreceptors, the developing outer segment layer was viewed by scanning electron microscopy at P7, P14 and P21 (Figure 4). In Crx+/+ retinas, photoreceptor inner segments, connecting cilia, and the first rudimentary outer segment structures were noted at P7. In the Crx-/- retina, only an occassional connecting cilium was noted emerging from inner segments at this stage (Figure 4A and 4B). This observation was confirmed by comparison with transmission electron micrographs (Figure 5). These differences are the earliest noted differences between Crx+/+ and Crx-/- photoreceptors. At P14, elongating outer segments were noted on Crx+/+ photoreceptors, occasionally demonstrating a paddle-like structure at their <andsystem-candidate> (Figure 4C, os). In Crx-/- retinae, the vast majority of photoreceptors at this stage demonstrated connecting cilia without outer segments (Figure 4D, cc). Sporadically, Crx-/- photoreceptors would exhibit an irregular structure extending from a connecting cilium (Figure 4D, cc*) perhaps representing a malformed outer segment. Such structures were also observed at P21 (Figure 4F, cc*). These putative, abnormal outer segments were only rarely noted in Crx+/+ at P14, and never at P21 (Figure 4C and 4E, cc*). Further, in Crx-/- photoreceptors, unusually long connecting cilia were noted (Figure 4F, cc). Serial examination of Crx-/- photoreceptors at P7, P10, P14, and P21 by TEM, demonstrated a distinctive lack of any structure interpretable as orderly stacks of discs or forming discs. These data demonstrate a complete absence of normal outer segment formation in the Crx mutant mouse, and the arrest of development of the photoreceptor appendage at the elongation stage of outer segment formation.
15676071	Transmission electron micrographs of Crx-/- photoreceptors in the photoreceptor layer at P7. (A) Photoreceptor layer of Crx+/+ retina demonstrating nascent outer segment structures (arrow) emerging from photoreceptor connecting cilia (cc). (B) Crx-/- photoreceptors exhibited connecting cilia (<andsystem-candidate>) at this early stage, however, nascent outer segment structures were not observed. Scale Bar = 1 μm.
15676071	In a previous study, we demonstrated that forced expression of a dominant-negative allele of Crx in developing rods blocked formation of both rod spherules in the outer plexiform layer (OPL) and outer segments [7]. To expand on these studies, the ultrastructure of photoreceptor synapses was examined in Crx-/- retinas. In Crx+/+ retinas at P21, newly mature rod spherules were abundant (Figure 7A). The sperules were blunt or club-shaped structures with a single ribbon associated with a single invaginating synapse (Figure 7A, arrow indicates one example; Figure 8A and 8B). Two processes from horizontal cells were situated on either side of the synaptic ridge (Figure 8B, labelled H) and one or more dendrites of rod bipolar cells occupied a central position (Figure 8B, bipolar labelled B). Cone terminals are large, flat pedicles that exhibit many invaginating synapses containing separate sets of horizontal and bipolar <andsystem-candidate> processes. Each pedicle contains numerous ribbons. These terminals were much less common than spherules in Crx+/+ retinas at P21 (Figure 7, box). In the OPL of Crx-/- retinas, photoreceptor terminals were highly disorganized at P21 (Figure 7B, arrows). Processes containing synaptic vesicles and ribbon-like structures were apparent, suggesting at least limited generation of synapse components. However, well formed spherules and pedicles were not observed. In addition, many terminals appeared to contain multiple ribbons (Figure 8C and 8D, r) not tethered to the plasma membrane and occasionally in perinuclear positions (Figure 8D).
15676071	Transmission electron micrographs of the outer plexiform layer in Crx-/- retinas at P21. (A) Crx+/+ rod spherules contained a single invaginating synapse with one ribbon complex. The spherule was a blunt or club-shaped structure. (B) Crx+/+ rod terminals contained a single ribbon structure (r). Two processes, from horizontal cells (h), contacted the rod laterally. An additional process, the postsynaptic bipolar dendrite (b), was situated more centrally. Terminals were filled with synaptic vesicles. One coated vesicle originatinf from the <andsystem-candidate> membrane was observed (arrow). (C) In the OPL of Crx-/- retinas, photoreceptor terminals appeared highly disorganized. Putative terminals containing synaptic vesicles and ribbon-like structures were apparent (arrows), suggesting at least limited generation of synapse components. However, well formed spherules and pedicles were not observed. Further, many terminals appeared to contain multiple ribbon-like structures (r). The majority of these ribbons were not associated with the synaptic membrane, but instead were found free floating and, in some instances, were perinuclear (D, arrow). H, horizontal cell; B, bipolar cell; N, nucleus; r, ribbon. (A) Scale bar = 500 nm, (B) Scale bar = 250 nm, (C and D) Scale bar = 500 nm.
15676071	Transmission electron micrographs of the outer plexiform layer in Crx-/- retinas at P21. (A) Crx+/+ rod spherules contained a single invaginating synapse with one ribbon complex. The spherule was a blunt or club-shaped structure. (B) Crx+/+ rod terminals contained a single ribbon structure (r). Two processes, from horizontal cells (h), contacted the rod laterally. An additional process, the postsynaptic bipolar dendrite (b), was situated more centrally. Terminals were filled with synaptic vesicles. One coated vesicle originatinf from the cell membrane was observed (arrow). (C) In the OPL of Crx-/- retinas, photoreceptor terminals appeared highly disorganized. Putative terminals containing synaptic vesicles and ribbon-like structures were apparent (arrows), suggesting at least limited generation of synapse components. However, well formed spherules and pedicles were not observed. Further, many terminals appeared to contain multiple ribbon-like structures (r). The majority of these ribbons were not associated with the synaptic membrane, but instead were found free floating and, in some instances, were perinuclear (D, arrow). H, horizontal cell; B, bipolar cell; <andsystem-candidate>, nucleus; r, ribbon. (A) Scale bar = 500 nm, (B) Scale bar = 250 nm, (C and D) Scale bar = 500 nm.
15676071	LCA is a disease in which there is little or no photoreceptor function in infancy; thereby, likely developmental in etiology ([17,56] for review). The Crx-/- mouse may be an excellent model for studying the pathology of this disorder, particularly the subtype of the disorder where Crx mutations are involved. The vast majority of histopathological studies of LCA in human tissue have been derived from adult patients with LCA where secondary changes are likely to be present. Indeed in animal models of LCA, secondary reactive and/or degenerative changes occur early after the abnormal formation of retinal tissue [57]. The only study in human tissue derived from a human 33-week retina with proposed RPE65 mutations was reported to have abnormal retinae at this early stage [24]. These authors report <andsystem-candidate> loss, including thinning of the photoreceptor layer. In addition, they claim in the text to have seen aberrant synaptic and inner retinal organization, although their examination of photoreceptor synapses unfortunately are not presented in the data section of the paper. Given the scarcity of available human tissue, the characterization of the primary pathology of LCA will require animal models. In the current study, we present data that argue that, in addition to outer segment morphogenesis, synaptogenesis may also be critically impaired in at least a subset of LCA.
14723793	Four transmembrane domains within Acdp4 protein. Transmembrane domains were predicted by the TMHMM program . The plot shows the posterior probabilities of inside /outside/<andsystem-candidate> helix. At the top of the plot (between 1 and 1.2) the N-best prediction is shown. The plot is obtained by calculating the total probability that a residue sits in helix, inside, or outside summed over all possible paths through the model.
14723793	Peptides from Acdp1 N- (TSFLLRVYFQPGPPATAAPVPSPT) and C- (TQQLTLSPAAVPTR) terminuses, conserved peptide from ACD domain of Acdp1 (HNIVDILFVKDLAFVDPDDCTPLLTVTRF) were commercially synthesized (Sigma Genosys). These antigenic sites were predicted by software from Sigma Genosys and polyclonal antibodies for each peptide were produced by immunizing rabbits. To test the specificity of the antibodies, we conducted Western-blot analysis of mouse brain tissue extracts. As shown in Fig. 6A, the antibody produced by C-terminal peptide specifically detected Acdp1 (lane 3). The antibody generated by N-terminal peptide recognized Acdp4 in addition to Acdp1, although the reactivity to latter was significantly higher (Fig. 6A, lane 2). As expected, the antibody produced by the conserved sequence peptide detected all Acdp proteins (Fig. 6A, lane 1). To further determine the specificity of the antibody against the Acdp1 C-terminus, we analyzed extracts of HEK293, 3T3 and PC12 cells. The results are shown in Fig. 6B. Apparently, this antibody detected a specific band of Acdp1 in all <andsystem-candidate> lysates. Of note, shown in Fig. 6B are signals of 10 μg extracts of HEK293 cell lysates, 100 μg extracts of 3T3 and PC12 cell lysates. Thus, the expression levels of Acdp1 in these cell types vary a lot, with the highest expression in HEK293 cells. Nevertheless, these immunoblot results support our analysis of brain tissue extracts that the antibody against Acdp1 C-terminus specifically recognizes Acdp-1.
14723793	The specificity of the Acdp1 C-terminus antibody suggests the possibility of using it to localize Acdp-1 within cells. Since Northern blot revealed almost exclusive expression of Acdp1 in the brain, we examined its subcellular localization in hippocampus neurons isolated from mouse embryos. The neurons were cultured on glass coverslips coated with a confluent monolayer of mouse cortical astrocytes in dishes. Immunostaining was using the Acdp1 C-terminus specific antibody. Confocal imaging revealed that Acdp1 is predominantly localized on the plasma membrane. A series of sections of a <andsystem-candidate> at the thickness of 0.5 micrometer clearly showed membrane location of Acdp1-immunoreactivity (Fig. 7), which is consistent with the observation of transmembrane domains within the Acdp proteins.
14723793	Fig. 6A: Immunoblot analysis of Acdp proteins in brain tissue extracts. Immunoblotting were carried out using a Western blotting detection system (ECL) (PIERCE). Lane 1, probed with antibody generated by conserved peptide. From top to bottom, each band corresponding to Acdp1 (115 kD), Acdp2 (100 kD), Acdp4 (90 kD) and Acdp3 (80 kD). Lane 2 and 3, probed with the Acdp1 antibodies generated by N-terminal and C-terminal peptides, respectively. Fig. 6B: Immunoblot analysis of Acdp1 in HEK293, 3T3 and PC12 cells. The blots were probed with the antibody against the C-terminus of Acdp-1. Lane 1, 10 μg of HEK293 <andsystem-candidate> lysates. Lane 2 and 3, 100 μg of 3T3 and PC12 cell lysates.
14723793	Sequence homology analyses revealed that Acdp proteins shared very strong AA homologies to the bacteria CorC protein and yeast Amip3 protein. CorA, B, C and D belong to a protein family involved in both influx and efflux of magnesium and cobalt. It has been shown that CorA mutants confer resistance to cobalt toxicity [9]. Amip3 appears to be a homologous to CorC protein which is involved in efflux of magnesium and cobalt in bacteria. Amip3 mutants confer resistant to copper toxicity. Acdp proteins also possess the domains that are found in bacteria CorC and yeast Amip3 proteins, such as the CBS domains, DUF21 domain and transmembrane domains. In addition, a cNMP-binding domain was found in all Acdp proteins, which is usually present in ion channels and cNMP-dependent kinases [10-13]. Using antibody produced by Acdp1 C-terminal peptide, we have shown that Acdp1 is predominantly localized on the plasma membrane in hippocampus neurons. In our previous study, we found human ACDP proteins are predominantly localized in the nucleus in HeLa cells [1]. The discrepancy for Acdp localization in neuronal cells could be caused by non-specificity for previous antibody which was produced by the recombinant ACD domain, or different cells used. In current study, the Acdp1 C-terminus antibody only recognizes Acdp1 in brain tissue extracts as well as in HEK293, 3T3 and PC12 <andsystem-candidate> lysates, suggesting the specificity of the antibody. Our observations suggested that Acdp might be involved in ion transport in mammalian cells. However, more detailed functional studies are needed to demonstrate the real functions of these proteins.
14737183	Many members of the animal kingdom display coat or skin color differences along their dorsoventral axis. To determine the mechanisms that control regional differences in pigmentation, we have studied how a classical mouse mutation, droopy ear (deH), affects dorsoventral skin characteristics, especially those under control of the Agouti gene. Mice carrying the Agouti allele black-and-tan (at) normally have a sharp boundary between dorsal black hair and yellow ventral hair; the deH mutation raises the pigmentation boundary, producing an apparent dorsal-to-ventral transformation. We identify a 216 kb deletion in deH that removes all but the first exon of the Tbx15 gene, whose embryonic expression in developing mesenchyme correlates with pigmentary and skeletal malformations observed in deH/deH animals. Construction of a targeted allele of Tbx15 confirmed that the deH phenotype was caused by Tbx15 loss of function. Early embryonic expression of Tbx15 in dorsal mesenchyme is complementary to Agouti expression in ventral mesenchyme; in the absence of Tbx15, expression of Agouti in both embryos and postnatal animals is displaced dorsally. Transplantation experiments demonstrate that positional identity of the skin with regard to dorsoventral pigmentation differences is acquired by E12.5, which is shortly after early embryonic expression of Tbx15. Fate-mapping studies show that the dorsoventral pigmentation boundary is not in register with a previously identified dermal <andsystem-candidate> lineage boundary, but rather with the limb dorsoventral boundary. Embryonic expression of Tbx15 in dorsolateral mesenchyme provides an instructional cue required to establish the future positional identity of dorsal dermis. These findings represent a novel role for T-box gene action in embryonic development, identify a previously unappreciated aspect of dorsoventral patterning that is widely represented in furred mammals, and provide insight into the mechanisms that underlie region-specific differences in body morphology.
14737183	Several mechanisms may contribute to regional differences in vertebrate pigmentation. In the embryo, alterations in the determination or migration of melanoblasts from the neural crest affect the number or distribution of pigment cells in the skin (reviewed in Reedy et al. 1998). Within hair follicles, paracrine signals control the type of pigment made in specific regions of the body or at specific times during the hair cycle (reviewed in Furumura et al. 1996; Barsh et al. 2000). Finally, movement of pigment granules within melanocytes or from melanocytes to keratinocytes makes use of cellular machinery that is shared by a variety of <andsystem-candidate> types, but that can vary in different regions of the body (reviewed in Marks and Seabra 2001). However, for all of these mechanisms—white spotting, pigment-type switching, and melanosome biogenesis—more is known about the identity of the molecular components than their spatial and temporal control.
14737183	In laboratory mice, previous studies from our group and others identified two predominant Agouti mRNA isoforms that differ by virtue of their transcriptional initiation site and 5′ untranslated exons. A “hair cycle-specific” transcript is expressed in both dorsal and ventral skin for 2–3 days during early hair growth, while a “ventral-specific” transcript is expressed throughout the entire period of active hair growth, but only in ventral skin (Bultman et al. 1994; Vrieling et al. 1994). Animals carrying the at allele express only the ventral-specific Agouti transcript (Bultman et al. 1994; Vrieling et al. 1994) and have black dorsal hairs and cream-colored to yellow ventral hairs, with a sharp boundary at the level of the limb–body wall articulations and in the middle of the whisker pad. Ventral-specific Agouti isoforms are also expressed in developing skin from embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5) and beyond and may play a role in pigment <andsystem-candidate> differentiation (Millar et al. 1995). Thus, regulatory elements for ventral-specific Agouti isoforms are responsive to dorsoventral positional cues established in the embryo and whose effects persist after birth.
14737183	The ectodermal notch that we used to mark the boundary between embryonic dorsum and embryonic flank is a characteristic feature in vertebrate embryos. In <andsystem-candidate> lineage studies carried out in the chick system, the notch serves as a landmark for the boundary between dermis derived from somitic mesoderm and dermis derived from lateral plate mesoderm and has been termed the “lateral somitic frontier” (Olivera-Martinez et al. 2000; Sudo et al. 2001; Burke and Nowicki 2003; Nowicki et al. 2003). Although fate-mapping studies have not been carried out in mammalian embryos, somite- and lateral plate-derived mesoderm could give rise to precursors for dermis dorsal and ventral to the limb–body wall junction, respectively. However, this notion conflicts with our observation that the future pigmentation boundary lies ventral to the ectodermal notch (see Figure 7).
14737183	The visual boundary between dorsal and ventral skin in at/at mice is reminiscent of other systems in which adjacent compartments enforce a binary choice between alternative patterns of gene expression and <andsystem-candidate> fate (reviewed in Dahmann and Basler 1999). However, Agouti mRNA in both embryonic and postnatal skin is distributed along a gradient whose dorsal boundary is indistinct and overlaps with two additional gradients recognized by their effects on hair length and histochemical staining for melanocytes. The three gradients are close but not congruent, and it is their proximity that gives rise to the superficial distinction between dorsal and ventral skin of at/at mice. Indeed, slight differences between the regions of transition for pigment-type switching and pigment content give rise to a subtle yellow stripe along the flank (see Figures 1, 2, and 9A). Levels of Agouti mRNA remain high throughout the entire ventrum, but hair pigment content is reduced, giving rise to a cream-colored region in the ventrum that, depending on age and genetic backgrounds, may appear more or less distinct from the yellow flank stripe.
14737183	Named for the presence of a DNA-binding domain first identified in the mouse Brachyury gene (haploinsufficiency causes a short tail), T box–containing genes have been identified as developmental regulators in a wide spectrum of tissues and multicellular organisms (reviewed in Papaioannou 2001). The Tbx15 subfamily, which also includes Tbx18 and Tbx22, is likely to have arisen during early chordate evolution since there is a single gene in amphioxus but no obvious homolog in the fly genome (Ruvinsky et al. 2000). Consistent with this relationship, the three genes are expressed in partially overlapping patterns that include anterior somites (Tbx18 and Tbx22), limb mesenchyme (Tbx15 and Tbx18), and craniofacial mesenchyme (all three genes, Tbx15 more broadly than Tbx18 or Tbx22) (Agulnik et al. 1998; Kraus et al. 2001; Braybrook et al. 2002; Bush et al. 2002; Herr et al. 2003). These observations suggest that an ancestral gene for Tbx15, Tbx18, and Tbx22 may have been important for craniofacial development in cephalochordates, with acquisition of additional expression patterns and developmental functions in the limb and the trunk during early vertebrate evolution. Expression of Tbx18 and Tbx22 has not been reported in embryonic flank mesenchyme, which suggests that Tbx15 is the only family member involved in establishing the dorsoventral identity of the trunk. However, it would not be surprising to find some degree of functional redundancy in animals mutated for two or three of the subfamily members in other body regions, particularly the limbs and the head. For example, mutations in Tbx22 cause the human syndrome <andsystem-candidate>-linked cleft palate and ankyloglossia (Braybrook et al. 2001). Despite high levels of Tbx22 expression in periocular embryonic mesenchyme (Braybrook et al. 2002; Bush et al. 2002; Herr et al. 2003), the condition does not affect the eye, perhaps because residual activity is provided by Tbx15 in the same region.
14737183	Our attention to the role of Tbx15 in pigment patterning was motivated by the effects of Agouti in postnatal animals. However, Agouti is also expressed in the embryo, where it provides a convenient marker of ventral dermis identity. Because an expanded domain of embryonic Agouti expression in deH/deH animals is detectable by E14.5, the effects of Tbx15 on dorsoventral patterning must occur prior to this time. Among other T-box genes whose developmental actions are at least partially understood, two general themes have emerged, one focused on the ability to specify alternative fates for an undifferentiated group of precursor cells and another focused on the ability to support proliferative expansion of a <andsystem-candidate> population whose fate is already determined (reviewed in Tada and Smith 2001). Either mechanism may apply to the apparent dorsal-to-ventral transformation in deH/deH mice. For example, while the expanded domain of Agouti expression in postnatal deH/deH animals can be traced to events that occur between E11.5 and E13.5, the underlying cause may be that embryonic cells in dorsolateral mesenchyme acquire a ventral rather than dorsal identity or that those cells fail to proliferate normally, followed by compensatory expansion of ventral cells. Cell lineage studies should provide a definitive answer, but we favor the latter hypothesis, because measurements of dorsoventral regions according to hair color in deH/deH mice revealed a small increase of the cream-colored ventral region in addition to the approximate doubling of the yellow flank region (see Figure 2).
14737183	Our attention to the role of Tbx15 in pigment patterning was motivated by the effects of Agouti in postnatal animals. However, Agouti is also expressed in the embryo, where it provides a convenient marker of ventral dermis identity. Because an expanded domain of embryonic Agouti expression in deH/deH animals is detectable by E14.5, the effects of Tbx15 on dorsoventral patterning must occur prior to this time. Among other T-box genes whose developmental actions are at least partially understood, two general themes have emerged, one focused on the ability to specify alternative fates for an undifferentiated group of precursor cells and another focused on the ability to support proliferative expansion of a cell population whose fate is already determined (reviewed in Tada and Smith 2001). Either mechanism may apply to the apparent dorsal-to-ventral transformation in deH/deH mice. For example, while the expanded domain of Agouti expression in postnatal deH/deH animals can be traced to events that occur between E11.5 and E13.5, the underlying cause may be that embryonic cells in dorsolateral mesenchyme acquire a ventral rather than dorsal identity or that those cells fail to proliferate normally, followed by compensatory expansion of ventral cells. <andsystem-candidate> lineage studies should provide a definitive answer, but we favor the latter hypothesis, because measurements of dorsoventral regions according to hair color in deH/deH mice revealed a small increase of the cream-colored ventral region in addition to the approximate doubling of the yellow flank region (see Figure 2).
14737183	These considerations notwithstanding, control of dorsoventral trunk pattern by Tbx15 shares certain features with control of dorsoventral limb patterning by Lmx1b, a LIM domain transcription factor that acts downstream of Wnt7a and En1 (Riddle et al. 1995; Vogel et al. 1995; Cygan et al. 1997; Logan et al. 1997; Loomis et al. 1998; Chen and Johnson 2002). Both Tbx15 and Lmx1b act autonomously in mesenchymal cells to promote a dorsal identity, yet have expression domains that do not correspond to <andsystem-candidate> lineage compartments in the flank (Tbx15) or the limb (Lmx1b) (Altabef et al. 1997; Michaud et al. 1997). In the case of Lmx1b, its expression in the distal limb depends on Wnt7a produced in the overlying dorsal ectoderm (Riddle et al. 1995; Cygan et al. 1997; Loomis et al. 1998). Wnt7a, in turn, is restricted to dorsal ectoderm by En1 in the ventral ectoderm (Loomis et al. 1996; Cygan et al. 1997; Logan et al. 1997), whose expression marks a lineage boundary coincident with the dorsoventral midline of the apical ectodermal ridge (Altabef et al. 1997; Michaud et al. 1997; Kimmel et al. 2000). As described above, En1 or Wnt7a mutations have not been reported to affect patterns of hair-color distribution (C. Loomis, personal communication; Parr and McMahon 1995; Loomis et al. 1996). However, the essential theme that ectodermal lineage compartments control the fate of underlying mesenchyme in developing limbs may apply to the trunk as well as the limb. The mammary glands also develop at a stereotyped dorsoventral position and depend on epithelial–mesenchymal interactions. However, the number and apparent position of the mammary glands are normal in deH/deH animals, indicating the existence of additional mechanisms that control dorsoventral patterning in the trunk as well as in the limbs.
14737183	These ideas are summarized in the model shown in Figure 9B. We speculate that a diffusible signal from dorsal trunk ectoderm, at or prior to E11.5, promotes expression of Tbx15 in dorsal trunk mesenchyme, which then establishes dorsal positional identity of those cells as manifested by differences in Agouti expression, pigment-<andsystem-candidate> development, and hair growth. Because the ventral limit of Tbx15 expression corresponds to the dorsal limit of En1 expression and because the normal position of the pigmentation boundary lies approximately in register with the limb-bud outgrowths, we depict the position of a putative dorsoventral boundary in trunk ectoderm as coincident with the limb dorsoventral boundary. This model is consistent with studies in the chick, where distinct dorsal and ventral lineage compartments exist for ectoderm in both the limb (Altabef et al. 1997, 2000; Michaud et al. 1997; Kimmel et al. 2000) and interlimb regions (Altabef et al. 1997, 2000), but not for limb mesoderm (Altabef et al. 1997; Michaud et al. 1997). In fact, the same mechanism that determines dorsoventral position of the limbs and the apical ectodermal ridge may also act on expression of Tbx15 in the trunk, since ectopic limbs induced in the interlimb region by application of FGF beads develop along a single line that is coincident with normal limb buds (and the future pigmentation boundary) (Cohn et al. 1995; Crossley et al. 1996; Vogel et al. 1996; Altabef et al. 1997, 2000).
14737183	The lateral somitic frontier, defined as the lineage boundary between somite-derived versus lateral plate-derived mesoderm, is established during somitogenesis early in development (Mauger 1972; Christ et al. 1983; Olivera-Martinez et al. 2000; Nowicki et al. 2003), but remains distinct in postnatal animals despite the potential for extensive <andsystem-candidate> mixing (see Figure 8). However, our transplantation and fate-mapping studies demonstrate that the lateral somitic frontier lies dorsal to the pigmentation boundary and does not obviously correlate with a difference in skin morphology. An additional dorsoventral domain that is not externally apparent has emerged from studies of Msx1, whose expression marks a subgroup of somite-derived mesenchymal cells that contribute to dermis in a narrow stripe along the paraspinal region (Houzelstein et al. 2000). Thus, there exist at least three distinct boundaries in postnatal mammalian skin that are parallel to the sagittal plane, marked by differences in pigment-type synthesis, differences in cell lineage, and differences in expression of Msx1.
14737183	The OMIM (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/) accession numbers discussed in this paper are for acromegaloid facial appearance (MIM 102150), frontofacionasal syndrome (MIM 229400) and human syndrome <andsystem-candidate>-linked cleft palate and ankyloglossia (MIM 303400).
16103912	Diaphragms from Fog2 lil mice show an intact membrane with a defect in muscular patterning (see Figure 1B). The membranous portion of the diaphragm is populated by a migratory population of muscle precursor cells, much like the limbs [19,20]. Mice with defects in genes known to be important for the control of this process have intact but amuscular diaphragms [17,21,22]. Hepatocyte growth factor/Scatter factor (HGF) is one potential candidate responsible for the guidance of muscle precursors to the membranous diaphragm. It has been shown that HGF is expressed along this anatomic pathway [23], and mice with absence of the HGF receptor c-Met fail to form muscularized pleuroperitoneal folds (PPFs), and thus have amuscular diaphragms [24,25]. Fog2 is expressed diffusely in the early amuscular diaphragm at E11.5 as well as in the later muscularized diaphragm (see Figure 3C and 3D). Pax3 and MyoD, transcription factors required for appropriate migration and determination of myogenic precursors, were detected in the PPFs of Fog2 lil mice (data not shown). However, in situ expression analysis demonstrated that the expression of HGF in the region where this structure meets the membranous diaphragm was markedly reduced in Fog2 mutant mice (Figure 6). We hypothesize that Fog2 is required (either directly or indirectly) for the induction of HGF in the developing diaphragm, and dysregulation of HGF patterning along the path of muscle precursor <andsystem-candidate> migration between the PPF and the diaphragm accounts for the abnormal phenotype in these mice.
16103912	It is unclear how the Fog2 diaphragmatic defect relates to the more common Bochdalek CDH, as the pathogenic mechanisms for both are largely unknown. Muscle precursors destined to populate the diaphragm migrate from the lateral dermomyotome of cervical somites. Prior to migration onto the diaphragm, they populate the PPF, a wedge-shaped tissue that tapers medially from the lateral body wall to the esophageal mesentery and fuses ventrally with the septum transversum [42]. Muscle precursors reach the PPF by E11, where they proliferate, differentiate, and then migrate toward the dorsolateral costal, sternal costal, and crural regions of the developing diaphragm. Thus, a defect in PPF formation subsequently results in the abnormal formation of the diaphragm [43]. We have shown that the Fog2 mutant does have an abnormal pattern of HGF expression in the region through which muscle precursor cells migrate onto the developing diaphragm. This finding may account for the abnormally patterned muscle that develops in the Fog2 mutant diaphragm. Although Pax3 and MyoD expression is detected in the PPF, a detailed analysis of transcription factors responsible for muscle precursor <andsystem-candidate> migration and differentiation will need to be completed both in the PPF and along the pathway of muscle precursor cell migration between the PPF and the membranous diaphragm. Fog2 can interact with any of the Gata factors, Gatas 1–6, as well as other transcription factors such as CoupTFII [44,45]. It is known that a Fog2–Gata4 interaction is critical for normal cardiac and gonadal development, but interacting factors in the lung and diaphragm have not yet been determined.
17194222	Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are secreted signaling molecules belonging to the transforming growth factor β superfamily, originally identified on the basis of their ability to induce ectopic bone formation when implanted within soft tissue in vivo [1–3]. BMP family members are now known to play an extremely diverse set of roles in a wide variety of developmental processes [4]. Even in the context of the morphogenesis of a single structure, these molecules can play a series of quite divergent roles. For example, during limb development, BMPs have been postulated to act sequentially in multiple distinct aspects of patterning, <andsystem-candidate> type specification, and differentiation of various tissues, particularly of the skeleton.
17194222	In contrast to the proposed roles for BMPs in anterior-posterior digit patterning, we obtained further support for the well-accepted idea that a threshold level of BMP signaling is necessary interdigitally for programmed <andsystem-candidate> death to occur. We observed syndactyly with variable penetrance in limbs developing without BMP2 activity (Figure 2B), and nearly complete soft tissue syndactyly of all digits in limbs deficient in both BMP2 and BMP4 (compare Figure 2C and Figure 2D).
17194222	A final aspect of patterning previously associated with BMP signaling is interdigital apoptosis. Consistent with this, we see some syndactyly in the BMP2-deficient limbs. The fact that this is variable, and limited to the 3/4 interdigit, implies that the threshold for induction of apoptosis is low enough that loss of BMP2, BMP4 or BMP7 or BMP2 and BMP7 still leaves sufficient BMP signaling for most interdigital <andsystem-candidate> death to occur normally. However, loss of both BMP2 and BMP4 results in complete soft tissue syndactyly, i.e., webbing between all the digits. Although BMP activity has been previously implicated in regulating interdigital apoptosis, this is the first genetic verification of their requirement for this process.
15328533	Type I muscle can be readily distinguished from type II or mixed muscle by its red color, because of its high concentration of myoglobin, a protein typically expressed in oxidative muscle fibers. We found that muscles in the transgenic mice appeared redder (Figure 2A), which is particularly evident in the mixed type I/II fibers of the hindlimb (Figure 2B). Indeed, metachromatic staining revealed a substantial muscle fiber transformation (Figure 2C). In gastrocnemius muscle, we estimated that there was a 2-fold increase of type I fibers. A diagnostic component of oxidative fibers is their high myoglobin and mitochondrial content, which is supported by the mRNA analysis shown in Figure 3A. In addition to myoglobin, mitochondrial components for electron transfer (cytochrome c and cytochrome c oxidase [<andsystem-candidate>] II and IV) and fatty-acid β-oxidation enzymes were elevated (Figure 3A; unpublished data). These effects appear to be direct consequences of PPARδ activation, as levels of PGC-1α, a coactivator involved in muscle fiber switch and mitochondrial biogenesis (Wu et al. 1999; Lehman et al. 2000; Lin et al. 2002), remained unchanged. Southern blot analysis detected a substantially higher copy number of the mitochondrial genome–encoded COXII DNA in the transgenic mice (Figure 3B). Mitochondrial DNA was increased 2.3-fold in gastrocnemius muscle of the transgenic mice (Figure 3C). These results reveal a marked stimulation of mitochondrial biogenesis and further support the idea that there is a muscle fiber switch. This conclusion was also confirmed by Western blot analysis. As shown in Figure 3D, the characteristic type I fiber proteins, such as myoglobin and cytochrome c and b, were significantly increased. More importantly, the specialized contraction protein troponin I (slow) of type I fiber was robustly induced; this was accompanied by a marked reduction of the specialized contraction protein troponin I (fast) of type II fiber, indicating a high degree of fiber transformation. We next examined whether acute activation of endogenous PPARδ would induce similar target genes. In agreement with the chronic effects in the transgenic mice, we found that, after treatment of wild-type C57B6J mice with the PPARδ-specific agonist GW501516 for only 10 d, genes for slow fiber contractile proteins, mitochondrial biogenesis, and β-oxidation were all upregulated (Figure 3E). This indicates that rapid, systematic, and coordinated changes of muscle fiber properties toward type I can be achieved by activation of the endogenous PPARδ pathway.
15328533	A number of previous studies have shown that obese individuals have fewer oxidative fibers, implying that the presence of oxidative fibers alone may play a part in obesity resistance. To test this possibility, we fed the transgenic mice and their wild-type littermates with a high-fat diet for 97 d. Although the initial body weights of the two groups were very similar, the transgenic mice had gained less than 50% at day 47, and only one-third at day 97, of the weight gained by the wild-type animals (Figure 4A). The transgenic mice displayed significantly higher oxygen consumption on the high-fat diet than the control littermates (unpublished data). By the end of this experiment, the control littermates became obese, whereas the transgenic mice still maintained a normal body weight and fat mass composition (Figure 4A). A histological analysis of inguinal fat pad revealed a much smaller <andsystem-candidate> size in the transgenic mice (Figure 4B), due to the increased muscle oxidative capacity. While there was no significant difference in intramuscular glycogen content, the triglyceride content was much less in the transgenic mice (Figure 4C and 4D), which may explain their improved glucose tolerance (Figure 4E). We also placed wild-type C57BJ6 mice on the high-fat diet and treated them with either vehicle or the PPARδ agonist GW501516 for 2 mo. GW501516 produced a sustained induction of genes for type I muscle fibers; this, at least in part, resulted in an only 30% gain in body weight, a dramatically reduced fat mass accumulation, and improved glucose tolerance, compared to the vehicle-treated group (Figure 5). Thus, muscle fiber conversion by stimulation with the PPARδ agonist or the activated transgene has a protective role against obesity.
15492776	Joint formation begins during embryogenesis, when stripes of high <andsystem-candidate> density called interzones form across developing skeletal precursors (Haines 1947). Programmed cell death occurs within the interzone, and a three-layered interzone forms that has two layers of higher cell density flanking a region of lower cell density. Non-joint precursors of the skeleton typically develop into cartilage, which hypertrophies and is replaced by bone. However, cells within the high-density layers of the interzone are excluded from this process and develop into the permanent layers of articular cartilage found in the mature joint (Mitrovic 1978).
15492776	A genetic system for activating or inactivating genes specifically in joint tissues would be particularly useful for further studies of joint formation and maintenance. Here we take advantage of the tissue-specific expression pattern of the Gdf5 gene to engineer a Cre/loxP system (Nagy 2000), Gdf5-Cre, that can be used to remove or ectopically express genes in joints. Tests with reporter mice show that this system is capable of modifying genes in all of the structures of the mature synovial joint, including the ligaments of the joint capsule, the synovial membrane, and the articular cartilage. Gdf5-Cre recombination bypasses the early embryonic lethality of null mutations in Bmpr1a, and shows that this receptor is required for early joint formation at some locations and for initiation of programmed <andsystem-candidate> death in webbing between digits. Interestingly, Bmpr1a is also required for postnatal maintenance of articular cartilage throughout most of the skeleton. In Gdf5-Cre/Bmpr1afloxP mice, articular cartilage initially forms normally, but subsequently loses expression of several key cartilage markers after birth. It ultimately fibrillates and degenerates, resulting in severe osteoarthritis and loss of mobility. These experiments suggest that BMP signaling is required for normal maintenance of postnatal articular cartilage, and that modulation of the BMP signaling pathway may play an important role in joint disease.
15492776	Interdigital mesenchyme is normally eliminated by apoptosis during embryonic development, a process that can be stimulated by BMP beads, inhibited by Noggin, or blocked by overexpression of dominant-negative BMP receptors (Garcia-Martinez et al. 1993; Yokouchi et al. 1996; Zou and Niswander 1996; Guha et al. 2002). Limbs of Gdf5-Cre/Bmpr1afloxP mutant embryos showed obvious retention of interdigital webbing between the first and second, but not other, digits of E14.5 forelimbs (Figure 2A and 2B), a pattern that corresponds to the presence or absence of webbing seen in the adult limb. They also showed excess tissue on the posterior margin of the fifth digit (Figure 2B, arrow). Analysis of LACZ expression in Gdf5-Cre/R26R reporter embryos showed that Cre-mediated recombination has occurred by E13.5 in the metacarpal-phalangeal joints, and in the interdigital region between the first and second, but not other, digits. In addition, a domain of recombination and expression of LACZ is also reproducibly seen in the posterior half of the fifth digit (Figure 2C). Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick end labeling (TUNEL) staining of interdigital mesenchyme between the first and second digits (Figure 2D and 2E) and the fifth digit flanking mesenchyme showed a decreased number of dying cells in the regions where excess tissue is retained in the mutant limbs. Numbers of phosphorylated histone H3-labeled proliferating cells were also elevated in these regions (Figure 2F). Most cells found in the webbed region between the first and second digits at E15.5 strongly expressed LACZ in Gdf5-Cre/Bmpr1afloxP mutant embryos (Figure 2H). These data suggest that regional loss of BMPR1A receptor signaling blocks programmed <andsystem-candidate> death in interdigital mesenchyme, and that the recombined cells survive and proliferate in the absence of BMPR1A signaling.
15492776	In most joints of Bmpr1a conditional knockout mice, embryonic segmentation of skeletal precursors occurred normally. Although Gdf5-Cre-mediated recombination was seen as early as E13.5 in digit interzone regions (see Figure 2C), no changes in <andsystem-candidate> death or cell proliferation could be seen in the metacarpal-phalangeal or metatarsal-phalangeal joints at E13.5 or E14.5 (unpublished data). Similarly, although clear LACZ expression was seen by E15.5 in interphalangeal joints and periarticular regions (Figure 4D), no difference in morphology or expression of Col2a1, Gdf5, or Bmpr1b was seen in the articular regions of the phalanges at these stages (unpublished data).
15492776	By 1 wk after birth, obvious differences began to be detected in the articular regions of mutant animals. The expression of Col2a1 was reduced throughout the articular surfaces of the carpals, metacarpals, and phalanges of the forefeet (unpublished data). Less severe reductions were also seen in articular cells of tarsals and metatarsals in the hindfeet (unpublished data). By 2 wk of age, Col2a1 expression was reduced in most cells of the articular region (Figure 5L and 5Q), accompanied by markedly reduced Safranin O staining (Figure 5K and 5P), and decreased expression of Agg and two genes normally expressed in more mature articular cartilage cells, Collagen 3 (Col3a1) and Collagen 10 (Col10a1) (Figure 5M and 5R) (unpublished data) (Eyre 2002). Inhibition of BMP signaling in cultured chondrocytes has previously been reported to induce Collagen 1 (Col1a1) expression, increase proliferation, and result in cells with flattened, fibroblast-like morphology (Enomoto-Iwamoto et al. 1998). However, we saw no increase in the expression of Col1a1 in mutant articular cartilage, and no proliferation was detected in articular cells of either mutant or control animals (unpublished data). While recombined LACZ marker expression was detected in most articular cartilage cells, it was also observed in scattered subarticular chondrocytes, growth plate chondrocytes, and osteoblasts (Figure 5O and 5T) (unpublished data). Although this implies that BMP signaling was defective in multiple <andsystem-candidate> types, the observed defects were confined to the articular cartilage. For example, Osteocalcin and Col1a1 expression appeared normal in osteoblasts (unpublished data). Together, these data suggest that BMPR1A activity is required in postnatal joint articular cartilage to maintain expression of many genes encoding structural components of cartilage matrix.
15492776	Previous studies have shown that Sox9 is required for normal cartilage differentiation, for expression of cartilage extracellular matrix (<andsystem-candidate>) genes including Agg, and is a direct transcriptional regulator of the key cartilage matrix gene Col2a1 (Bell et al. 1997; Lefebvre et al. 1997; Bi et al. 1999; Sekiya et al. 2000). Notably, despite reduced expression of many cartilage matrix marker genes in Bmpr1a mutant mice, the SOX9 protein was present at normal levels in articular regions at all stages examined, including newborn, 2-wk-old, 7-wk-old, and 9-mo-old mice (Figure 5N and 5S) (unpublished data).
15492776	Conditional loss of Bmpr1a led to marked hypertrophy of the synovial membrane in the joint capsule of some joints, particularly in the ankle region. In the most severely affected joints, the expanded synovial membrane grew into the joint space and was associated with obvious loss or erosion of the articular cartilage (Figure 6A and 6B, asterisks, arrows). Accelerated cartilage maturation and increased expression of Col10a1 was frequently seen in the chondrocytes underlying the articular erosions (Figure 6C and 6D, brackets) (unpublished data). Interestingly, the regions of increased Col10a1 expression did not correspond to the regions that had undergone Cre-mediated recombination. Instead, increased expression of Col10a1 was seen in a zone of largely LACZ-negative cells stretching from the cartilage adjacent to the ossification front (where Col10a1 is normally expressed in maturing cartilage cells), toward the regions where surface articular cartilage was severely eroded or missing (Figure 6A and 6B, arrowheads). Previous studies suggest that parathyroid hormone-related protein, a diffusible signal made in the articular surface, may normally inhibit maturation of underlying cartilage (Vortkamp et al. 1996; Weir et al. 1996). Local loss of the articular surface could remove this inhibition and lead to a <andsystem-candidate>-nonautonomous acceleration of maturation in chondrocytes underlying points of articular erosion.
15492776	This synovial hypertrophy is associated with increased numbers of mononuclear cells resembling synoviocytes or macrophages, <andsystem-candidate> types that are difficult to distinguish even with surface markers at early postnatal stages. However, no neutrophils were observed, suggesting that there is little inflammation. At later stages synovial hypertrophy is reduced. Further work will be needed to determine whether synovial development is regulated by BMP signaling, or whether the synovium becomes enlarged as a response to nearby skeletal malformations (such as fusion of the second and central tarsals or defects in the articular cartilage).
15492776	At 7 wk of age the normally domed tibial epiphysis was flattened and depressed in the knees of mutant animals, markedly reducing the distance between the growth plate and articular surface (Figure 7E and 7H, vertical bar). Articular cartilage was also thinner than in control animals, showed nearly complete absence of Safranin O staining, and was either acellular or beginning to fibrillate in many regions (Figure 7F and 7I). The few large Safranin O-stained cells still apparent in mutant articular regions appeared to correspond in position to rare LACZ-negative cells in adjacent sections, suggesting that Bmpr1a is required <andsystem-candidate>-autonomously in articular cartilage (Figure 7I and 7J, white arrowheads). By 9 mo, large areas of mutant knees were devoid of articular cells, and the bones of the femur and tibia appeared to rub directly against each other. Furthermore, the epiphysis of the tibia was extremely depressed, to the point that growth plate cartilage was almost exposed through the surface of the bone (Figure 7K, 7L, 7N, and 7O). In addition, mutants at 7 wk and 9 mo showed subchondral sclerosis, especially in the epiphysis of the femur (Figure 7E, 7H, 7K, and 7N, asterisks). While subchondral sclerosis is commonly seen in cases of osteoarthritis, it is unclear in this case whether the sclerosis is mainly a response of bone formation to compensate for decreased articular cartilage, or whether it is the effect of loss of Bmpr1a signaling in some LACZ-positive cells that are also observed in these regions (unpublished data).
15492776	Articular cartilage is a key component of synovial joints and is one of the few regions in the skeleton where cartilage is maintained into adulthood. Despite the importance of articular cartilage in joint health and mobility, little is known about the factors that create and maintain it in thin layers at the ends of long bones. In our experiments, articular cartilage lacking Bmpr1a retains some normal characteristics, in that it maintains a very low proliferation rate, does not express Col1a1, and continues to express SOX9, a major transcription factor regulating expression of structural components of cartilage matrix. However, several of the most prominent structural components of cartilage matrix fail to be maintained in mutant animals, resulting in decreased synthesis of Col2a1, Agg, and proteoglycans. Therefore, BMPR1A appears to maintain articular cartilage primarily through inducing expression of key <andsystem-candidate> components.
15492776	It is interesting that the SOX9 transcription factor continues to be expressed in mutant cartilage despite loss of Col2a1, a direct target of this transcription factor (Bell et al. 1997; Lefebvre et al. 1997). Previous studies suggest that SOX9 activity can be modified by protein kinase A (PKA)-dependent protein phosphorylation, or by coexpression of two related proteins, L-SOX5 and SOX6 (Lefebvre et al. 1998; Huang et al. 2000). In addition, close examination of the order of genes induced during chicken digit formation reveals that Sox9 turns on first, followed by Bmpr1b with L-Sox5, and then Sox6 and the cartilage matrix structural components Col2a1 and Agg (Chimal-Monroy et al. 2003). These results, together with the altered pattern of gene expression seen in our Bmpr1a-deficient mice, suggest that BMPR1A signaling may normally act to stimulate SOX9 by post-translational protein modification, or to induce L-Sox5 or Sox6 in cartilage to maintain expression of <andsystem-candidate> components. These models are consistent with the ability of BMP2 to both increase PKA activity and induce expression of Sox6 in tissue culture cells (Lee and Chuong 1997; Fernandez-Lloris et al. 2003). Although we have tried to monitor the expression of L-Sox5 or Sox6 in postnatal articular cartilage, and test the phosphorylation state of SOX9 using previously described reagents (Lefebvre et al. 1998; Huang et al. 2000), we have been unable to obtain specific signal at the late postnatal stages required (unpublished data). Furthermore, null mutations in L-Sox5 or Sox-6 cause lethality at or soon after birth, and no effect on cartilage maintenance has been reported (Smits et al. 2001). However, it seems likely that these or other processes regulated by BMP signaling cooperate with SOX9 to induce target genes in articular cartilage.
15492776	Mutation of Smad3 or expression of dominant negative transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) type II receptor also disrupts normal articular cartilage maintenance (Serra et al. 1997; Yang et al. 2001). Both manipulations should disrupt TGFβ rather than BMP signaling, and both manipulations cause articular cartilage to hypertrophy and be replaced by bone. In contrast, our analysis of Bmpr1a mutant articular cartilage showed a loss of <andsystem-candidate> components, but no signs of hypertrophy or bone replacement. Therefore, TGFβ and BMP signaling are playing distinct but necessary roles to maintain articular cartilage.
15492776	Limbs from mutant and control animals at E13.5 and E14.5 were dissected and frozen in OCT (Sakura Finetek,Torrence, CA, United States). Cryosections of tissue were assayed by TUNEL using the In Situ <andsystem-candidate> Death Detection Kit, Fluorescein (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Following TUNEL, slides were washed in PBS, blocked with PBS + 0.05% Tween-20 + 5% goat serum, washed again, and incubated with a 1:200 dilution of a rabbit anti-phospho-histone-H3 antibody called Mitosis Marker (Upstate Biotechnology, Lake Placid, New York, United States) to identify cells in mitosis. Cy3-labeled anti-rabbit secondary antibody was used to detect the antibody. Cell nuclei were labeled with DAPI, and slides were mounted in Vectamount (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, California, United States) and visualized at 100× magnification. The area of selected anatomical sites were measured, and the number of TUNEL-labeled nuclear fragments and the number of Cy3-labeled nuclei were counted from three 10-μm sections spanning 50 μm, from three control and three mutant animals. The number of labeled cells in the metacarpal-phalangeal and metatarsal-phalangeal joints was counted in a 290 μm × 365 μm rectangle placed around the center of the joint. The posterior region of the fifth digit was defined by drawing a line from the tip of the digit down 2.15 mm and across to the lateral edge of the tissue. For this analysis, the R26R Cre reporter was not present.
15492776	Near adjacent sections from the tarsal 2-metatarsal II joint of 7-d-old mice. (A and B) LACZ staining (blue) shows Cre-mediated recombination is largely restricted to articular (arrowheads) and synovial cells (asterisks) in both controls and mutants. (C and D) In situ hybridization shows Col10 expression expands in mutants toward regions of synovial membrane expansion and articular surface erosion (brackets and arrows). This may be a <andsystem-candidate> nonautonomous effect of joint damage, since the LACZ expressing cells at the articular surface do not show upregulation of Col10 (arrowheads) and the region of expanded Col10 expression is largely made up of cells that have not undergone Cre-mediated recombination. Note the formation of a cartilaginous bridge along the joint capsule of the mutant where joint formation is disrupted at earlier stages (B, white arrowhead, and Figure 3, white arrowheads). (A) Scale bar = 75 μm.
15492776	(E–P) Sagittal sections through knee joints of 7-wk- (E–J) or 9-mo-old animals (K–P); fe, femur; ti, tibia; gp, growth plate. Seven weeks after birth, the height of the tibial epiphysis is reduced in mutants (E and H, bars), and their articular layer stains poorly with Safranin O, is fibrillated, and is strikingly thinner (F and I, black arrowhead, and brackets). Near adjacent sections with LACZ staining confirm Cre-mediated recombination has occurred in articular cells (G and J). Note that in mutants, LACZ is absent in cells adjacent to those that do stain with Safranin O, suggesting Bmpr1a may act <andsystem-candidate> autonomously (I and J, white arrowheads). At 9 mo old, the mutant tibial epiphysis is extremely thin (K and N, bars), and the articular layer is completely absent, leaving bone to rub directly on bone (L and O, bracket). LACZ staining shows Cre-mediated recombination occurred in articular cells of controls (M) and in some remaining skeletal tissue of mutants (P). Also note aberrantly formed meniscal cartilage in mutants (E, H, K, and N, arrows), and increased sclerosis in mutant epiphyses (E, H, K, and N, asterisks).
16221973	Primary embryonic fibroblasts were isolated from a 12.5 day old Mtf1loxP mouse embryo and grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (ICN), 100 U/ml penicillin–streptomycin (Gibco BRL) and 2 mM l-glutamine (Gibco BRL). 100 mm plates with primary cells were transfected with 10 µg of an expression plasmid coding for simian virus 40 (SV40) large T antigen driven by the cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter, using lipofectamine™ reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. <andsystem-candidate> foci were isolated and the immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblast cell line ckoC was derived from one of them. The Mtf1loxP genotype of this line as well as the genomic integration of the T antigen were confirmed by PCR. 100 mm plates with these cells were further transfected by the calcium phosphate method (30) with 19.6 µg of an expression plasmid for Cre recombinase driven by the CMV promoter and 0.4 µg of an expression plasmid for the neomycin resistance gene under the control of the TK promoter. Stably transfected cells were selected in the presence of 0.4 µg/µl G418 (Calbiochem), isolated clones of resistant cells were harvested and grown independently, and the expression of Cre recombinase and excision of exons 3 and 4 of Mtf1 were analyzed by RT–PCR. The cell lines delC19, delC21 and delC23 with a deletion of Mtf1 were chosen for further experiments.
16221973	Primary embryonic fibroblasts were isolated from a 12.5 day old Mtf1loxP mouse embryo and grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (ICN), 100 U/ml penicillin–streptomycin (Gibco BRL) and 2 mM l-glutamine (Gibco BRL). 100 mm plates with primary cells were transfected with 10 µg of an expression plasmid coding for simian virus 40 (SV40) large T antigen driven by the cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter, using lipofectamine™ reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Cell foci were isolated and the immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblast <andsystem-candidate> line ckoC was derived from one of them. The Mtf1loxP genotype of this line as well as the genomic integration of the T antigen were confirmed by PCR. 100 mm plates with these cells were further transfected by the calcium phosphate method (30) with 19.6 µg of an expression plasmid for Cre recombinase driven by the CMV promoter and 0.4 µg of an expression plasmid for the neomycin resistance gene under the control of the TK promoter. Stably transfected cells were selected in the presence of 0.4 µg/µl G418 (Calbiochem), isolated clones of resistant cells were harvested and grown independently, and the expression of Cre recombinase and excision of exons 3 and 4 of Mtf1 were analyzed by RT–PCR. The cell lines delC19, delC21 and delC23 with a deletion of Mtf1 were chosen for further experiments.
16221973	Samples of 1 × 104 cells/well were plated in 96-well tissue culture plates and allowed to adhere for 24 h. The cells were then pre-incubated for 24 h in medium containing 0, 5, 10, 25 or 50 µM l-buthionine-[S,R]-sulfoximine (BSO) (Sigma), a drug that inhibits glutathione synthesis (31). Later, cells were exposed to 0, 5, 10 or 20 µM CdCl2 in the specified pre-incubation medium for an additional 24 h. Cytotoxicity was determined by the MTT (3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromid)-based <andsystem-candidate> Proliferation Kit I (Roche) according to the manufacturer's instructions.
16221973	To analyze the role of the glutathione system in the cellular cadmium response, mouse embryonic fibroblasts with and without functional Mtf1 were treated with cadmium in combination with BSO, a specific inhibitor of glutamate-cysteine ligase (31), and <andsystem-candidate> viability was assessed by a colorimetric assay based on the tetrazolium salt MTT (Figure 6). Increasing concentrations of BSO or cadmium alone were to some extent cytotoxic for the examined cell lines. Treatment with both BSO and cadmium resulted in an enhanced lethality particularly for the cells without functional Mtf1, indicating that a depletion of glutathione together with a lack of Mtf1 impair an efficient anti-cadmium defense. Thus, adequate glutathione supply as well as MTF-1 and its target genes are essential for the survival of the cell under cadmium stress.
16221973	Besides genes related to the glutathione pathway, several other stress-related genes were upregulated upon cadmium exposure, including genes for thioredoxin reductase 1 (Txnrd1), one of the reducing enzymes of the antioxidant thioredoxin (46); KDEL endoplasmic reticulum protein retention receptor 2 (Kdelr2) participating in <andsystem-candidate> stress response (47); and the anti-apoptotic Bcl2-associated athanogene 3 (Bag3) involved in stress-induced apoptosis (48).
16221973	Ndrg1, another interesting MTF-1 target gene was named N-myc downstream regulated gene 1 following the discovery that the transcription factor N-myc represses the expression of mouse Ndrg1 (51). Transcription of Ndrg1 and/or its human ortholog is induced by different physiological and <andsystem-candidate> stress conditions, such as androgens, nickel compounds, DNA damage and hypoxia (37–40,52,53). In addition, the protein is overexpressed in human cancers of many tissues, such as lung, liver, brain, breast, kidney and skin (40). Although Ndrg1 and especially its human ortholog have been quite intensely studied, its function remains unclear; however, the induction by stimuli like nickel and hypoxia suggests an involvement in the cell stress response. Such a role is strongly endorsed by our finding that Ndrg1 gene expression is also induced by cadmium, and that MTF-1 plays a crucial role in this induction.
15550985	Neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) is required for proprioceptive neuron survival. Deletion of the proapoptotic gene Bax in NT-3 knockout mice rescues these neurons and allows for examination of their <andsystem-candidate> growth in the absence of NT-3 signaling. TrkC-positive peripheral and central axons from dorsal root ganglia follow proper trajectories and arrive in close proximity to their targets but fail to innervate them. Peripherally, muscle spindles are absent and TrkC-positive axons do not enter their target muscles. Centrally, proprioceptive axons branch in ectopic regions of the spinal cord, even crossing the midline. In vitro assays reveal chemoattractant effects of NT-3 on dorsal root ganglion axons. Our results show that survival factor NT-3 acts as a short-distance axon guidance molecule for muscle sensory afferents as they approach their proper targets.
15550985	TrkA/TrkC-positive fibers in the spinal cord could be detected at E15 (Figure 1E). TrkA-positive fibers were restricted to and terminated in the dorsolateral spinal cord, whereas TrkC-positive fibers entered the cord dorsomedially, and descended into the ventral horns in WT (Ozaki and Snider 1997) and Bax KO embryos. There was no detectable TrkC expression in NT-3 KO spinal cord, indicating complete absence of proprioceptive fibers. In double KO spinal cord, TrkC-positive fibers entered the dorsal spinal cord and descended medially in a manner similar to that seen in WT or Bax KO cases. However, it was not possible to follow TrkC immunolabeled fibers all the way to their terminal zones in any of the cases. Next we examined the central projections of DRG axons with the lipophilic tracer DiI at P0. In WT and Bax KO pups, proprioceptive afferents entered the dorsal spinal cord and followed a medial course towards the ventral horn. They then turned laterally towards motor neurons in the lateral motor column, where they branched and terminated (Figure 2A). DiI labeling was confined to dorsal spinal cord in NT-3 KOs (Figure 2A), as reported earlier, consistent with a complete absence of proprioceptive innervation (Ernfors et al. 1994; Tessarollo et al. 1994). In double KOs, proprioceptive afferents initially followed a trajectory similar to that of WT counterparts, but most of them failed to project all the way to the ventral cord and into the lateral motor column. Instead, they arborized near the ventral midline; some crossed the midline and extended into the contralateral ventral cord (Figure 2A and 2C). In order to distinguish between a role for NT-3 in initiation of motor neuron innervation and a role for maintenance, we repeated the DiI labeling at E17. Innervation patterns of E17 spinal cords (Figure 3) were similar to those at P0 (Figure 2). Dorsal horns of all genotypes were filled with DiI-labeled fibers corresponding to nerve growth factor–dependent nociceptive axons. In WT and Bax KO embryos, proprioceptive fibers extended towards ventral horn motor neurons (Figure 3A and 3B), whereas the ventral horns of the NT-3 KO embryos were devoid of innervation (Figure 3C). In the Bax/NT-3 double KOs, DiI-labeled fibers entered the ventral spinal cord, but extended towards the midline instead of the ventral horn (Figure 3D), in a pattern similar to that observed at P0. Our data point to a complete absence of proprioceptive innervation of the ventral horn of the Bax/NT-3 null spinal cord throughout the developmental stages investigated. As the sensory axons never reach motor neuron dendrites in the ventral horn (Figure S1), the stretch reflex arc circuit is not established. The failure to initiate contact between sensory axons and motor neurons in the absence of NT-3 suggests a requirement for NT-3 for proper <andsystem-candidate> targeting in addition to a role in sensory axon maintenance.
15550985	To test the hypothesis that NT-3 acts as a chemoattractant for sensory axons, we performed a series of in vitro assays. Proprioceptive axons in mice enter the gray matter in the spinal cord and advance ventrally parallel to the midline by E13 and reach the motor neurons by E15 (Ozaki and Snider 1994). We co-cultured collagen-embedded E13 WT DRG explants with NT-3-soaked sepharose beads (n = 26). Control cultures were set up using bovine serum albumin (BSA)– or phosphate buffer saline (PBS)–soaked beads (n = 12). DRG axons began extending towards the localized NT-3 source by the end of the first day and consistently displayed a strong chemoattraction by 3 d in vitro, whereas they did not show such preference for BSA-loaded control beads (Figure 5A and 5B). This attraction was not due to survival support of NT-3 because Bax null ganglia displayed the same chemoattraction (Figure 5C; n = 16). NT-3 may act through either TrkC, or the p75NTR. We repeated the co-culture experiments with DRG explants derived from p75NTR KO mice (n = 18). Axons of these ganglia also showed strong chemoattraction towards the NT-3 beads (Figure 5D). Finally, we used diffusible TrkC receptors conjugated to IgG constant regions (TrkC-Fc) added to the medium (n = 6) to deplete soluble NT-3 from the collagen gels (Figure 5E). In the presence of TrkC-Fc the chemoattraction was completely blocked, demonstrating that the effect we see is specific for NT-3. In order to investigate the active range of our beads, we have repeated the cultures with WT E13 DRGs by placing the beads at increasing distances from the ganglia (n = 4 each) (Figure 5F). There was still preferred growth towards the bead at 1,200μm, the longest distance studied, although the number of axons and the extent of growth were not as robust. Next, we set up E13 DRG spinal cord explant cultures using NT-3-loaded beads placed at the midline at mid-spinal cord level as an ectopic NT-3 source (n = 15). Control cultures were set using PBS-loaded beads (n = 6). DiI labeling through the DRGs revealed numerous fibers entering the spinal cord at ectopic regions and growing towards the NT-3 beads (Figure 6A), surrounding the beads and forming bundles around them (Figure 6C–6E). In control cultures, all labeled fibers were directed towards the dorsal spinal cord and terminated there, where they normally enter the gray matter at E13 (Figure 6B). No axons were observed around the PBS-loaded control beads (Figure 6F). Axons that normally enter the gray matter through dorsal spinal cord grow towards the midline when presented with a localized NT-3 source, and new <andsystem-candidate> growth towards the NT-3 bead is initiated from DRGs, entering the spinal cord at ectopic loci at lateral mid-spinal cord (Figure 6G). NT-3 is therefore capable of acting as a chemoattractant for DRG axons.
15550985	Relatively few studies have implicated NT-3 as a chemoattractant agent for sensory and motor axons. Previously noted chemoattractant action of the embryonic mouse maxillary process on trigeminal ganglion neurons (Lumsden and Davies 1986) is now attributed to NT-3 and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) (O'Connor et al. 1999). Recently, Tucker et al. (2001) showed that developing sensory and motor axons in limb slice cultures preferentially grow towards neurotrophin-soaked beads instead of following their normal trajectories. Conversely, beads soaked with neurotrophin function-blocking antibodies led to reduction of sensory and motor <andsystem-candidate> growth towards the limb. In transgenic mice, which over-express NT-3 under the nestin promoter in the central nervous system, the course of the proprioceptive afferents are altered and directed towards the regions with high levels of ectopic NT-3 expression in the spinal cord (Ringstedt et al. 1997). Ringstedt et al. considered the possibility that NT-3 may play a chemoattractant role during the innervation of ventral horns by proprioceptive afferents. However, earlier findings of normal proprioceptive afferent trajectories in chicken embryos despite injection of function-blocking NT-3 antibody into the spinal cord (Oakley et al. 1995) led them to discount this possibility. In that study, though, assays on the effectiveness of antibody perturbation on NT-3-dependent cell survival showed that effectiveness was significant (approximately 90%) but not complete (Oakley et al. 1995). Ringstedt et al. (1997) argue that while central sensory axons may still navigate properly in the absence of NT-3, ectopic expression of NT-3 disrupts their targeting. Recently, another member of the neurotrophin family, BDNF, has been suggested to act as a chemoattractant for sensory axons innervating ear (Tessarollo et al. 2004). In a gene replacement strategy in which BDNF expression was driven by the NT-3 promoter, vestibular axons rerouted towards ectopic sources of BDNF in the cochlea that normally expressed NT-3 and were not innervated by these axons. Ectopic NT-3 supplied using osmotic pumps and adenovirus-mediated expression induce sensory axon growth during regeneration (Zhang et al. 1998, Bradbury et al. 1999, Oudega et al. 1999, Ramer et al. 2002), and induce axonal plasticity of corticospinal axons in injured adult spinal cord (Zhou et al. 2003), where the sprouting axons from the intact site cross the midline towards the NT-3 source on the lesion side of the spinal cord. Our present results are in agreement with these observations, and provide further evidence that NT-3 acts as a chemoattractant for sensory afferents.
15550985	Relatively few studies have implicated NT-3 as a chemoattractant agent for sensory and motor axons. Previously noted chemoattractant action of the embryonic mouse maxillary process on trigeminal ganglion neurons (Lumsden and Davies 1986) is now attributed to NT-3 and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) (O'Connor et al. 1999). Recently, Tucker et al. (2001) showed that developing sensory and motor axons in limb slice cultures preferentially grow towards neurotrophin-soaked beads instead of following their normal trajectories. Conversely, beads soaked with neurotrophin function-blocking antibodies led to reduction of sensory and motor axon growth towards the limb. In transgenic mice, which over-express NT-3 under the nestin promoter in the central nervous system, the course of the proprioceptive afferents are altered and directed towards the regions with high levels of ectopic NT-3 expression in the spinal cord (Ringstedt et al. 1997). Ringstedt et al. considered the possibility that NT-3 may play a chemoattractant role during the innervation of ventral horns by proprioceptive afferents. However, earlier findings of normal proprioceptive afferent trajectories in chicken embryos despite injection of function-blocking NT-3 antibody into the spinal cord (Oakley et al. 1995) led them to discount this possibility. In that study, though, assays on the effectiveness of antibody perturbation on NT-3-dependent <andsystem-candidate> survival showed that effectiveness was significant (approximately 90%) but not complete (Oakley et al. 1995). Ringstedt et al. (1997) argue that while central sensory axons may still navigate properly in the absence of NT-3, ectopic expression of NT-3 disrupts their targeting. Recently, another member of the neurotrophin family, BDNF, has been suggested to act as a chemoattractant for sensory axons innervating ear (Tessarollo et al. 2004). In a gene replacement strategy in which BDNF expression was driven by the NT-3 promoter, vestibular axons rerouted towards ectopic sources of BDNF in the cochlea that normally expressed NT-3 and were not innervated by these axons. Ectopic NT-3 supplied using osmotic pumps and adenovirus-mediated expression induce sensory axon growth during regeneration (Zhang et al. 1998, Bradbury et al. 1999, Oudega et al. 1999, Ramer et al. 2002), and induce axonal plasticity of corticospinal axons in injured adult spinal cord (Zhou et al. 2003), where the sprouting axons from the intact site cross the midline towards the NT-3 source on the lesion side of the spinal cord. Our present results are in agreement with these observations, and provide further evidence that NT-3 acts as a chemoattractant for sensory afferents.
15550985	Patel et al. (2003) also present observations from islet2DTA mice, which lack a significant portion of the motor neurons in the ventral cord. In these mice PV immunostaining shows axons in the ventral horns. Patel et al. argue that since motor neurons are absent in these mice, NT-3 secreted by them could not be a signal for proprioceptive axons to enter the lateral motor columns. However, there is no evidence showing that NT-3 mRNA or protein expressed in the ventral spinal cord is exclusively from motor neurons, and there are no available data indicating that in islet2DTA mice, NT-3 expression in the ventral spinal cord is abolished (Yang et al. 2001; Pun et al. 2002). Studies in embryonic mice reported NT-3 mRNA in the ventral horns of the spinal cord, but it is not definitive that both mRNA and protein are expressed solely by motor neurons. In the adult spinal cord, while motor neurons express high levels of NT-3, other cells, including glia, also express it (Zhou and Rush 1994; Dreyfus et al. 1999; Buck et al. 2000). Our present results, along with those from transgenic mice with NT-3 over-expression in ectopic regions of the spinal cord (Ringstedt et al. 1997), argue for a role of NT-3 in chemoattractant <andsystem-candidate> guidance of proprioceptive axons in the spinal cord.
15550985	Finally, in culture assays, we see a strong chemoattraction of DRG neurons to localized sources of NT-3. This response is seen in WT, Bax null and in p75 null DRG explants, and in the absence of any other neurotrophins or target-derived <andsystem-candidate> guidance molecules. Furthermore, in vitro, sensory axon response to NT-3 does not appear to be dose-dependent (Ringstedt et al. 1997; Tucker et al. 2001). NT-3 is capable of attracting axons along distances of up to 1 mm in collagen gel matrix, covering the physiological range it needs to attract axons during development. Previous studies with exogenous or local applications of NT-3 to developing primary sensory axons have indicated that this neurotrophin can attract and induce axonal branching (Ulupınar et al. 2000; Özdinler and Erzurumlu 2001, Özdinler et al. 2004).
15550985	Along the monosynaptic stretch reflex pathway, only Wnt-3 has been implicated as an <andsystem-candidate> arborization factor in the spinal cord (Krylova et al. 2002). Another molecule, Slit2, expressed in the midline and by motor neurons (Wang et al. 1999) is capable of inducing axonal branching (Nguyen Ba-Charvet et al. 2001; Özdinler and Erzurumlu 2002). DRG neurons express Robo receptors, which bind to Slits, and proprioceptive axons are therefore capable of responding to Slit signals (Wang et al. 1999). Slit2 does not cause repulsion of NT-3-responsive DRG axons in vitro (Nguyen Ba-Charvet et al. 2001), but causes ectopic branching and arborization of trigeminal axons in the brainstem (Özdinler and Erzurumlu 2002). Thus, Slit2 might also be involved in terminal branching of propioceptive axons in the ventral cord and in the midline branching observed in our double KOs.
15550985	Lack of PV expression in Bax/NT-3 KO mice suggests that PV expression might be responsible for proper <andsystem-candidate> targeting and muscle spindle differentiation. Presently we cannot completely rule out this possibility. However, no defects in axon pathfinding along the monosynaptic reflex arc or in muscle spindle differentiation have been noted in PV KO mice, which develop normally and show no apparent changes in their behavior or physical activity (Schwaller et al. 1999). These observations suggest that axonal targeting defects in Bax/NT-3 double KO mice cannot be simply due to lack of PV expression in proprioceptive cells.
15550985	Our present results suggest that NT-3 acts as a short-range <andsystem-candidate> guidance cue for proprioceptive axons centrally and peripherally, as they navigate to their targets using other axon guidance cues. In its absence, these axons terminate in inappropriate loci. However, NT-3 may not be the only molecule that plays a role in targeting and terminal branching of sensory axons in the ventral spinal cord. NT-3 most likely acts cooperatively with other axon guidance molecules or by regulating expression of yet to be identified proprioceptive neuron-specific receptors/ligands for numerous axon guidance cues.
15588329	To elucidate the consequences of the common JNCL mutation in neuronal cells, we used P4 knock-in mouse cerebella to establish conditionally immortalized CbCln3 wild-type, heterozygous, and homozygous neuronal precursor <andsystem-candidate> lines, which can be differentiated into MAP-2 and NeuN-positive, neuron-like cells. Homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 precursor cells express low levels of mutant battenin and, when aged at confluency, accumulate ATPase subunit c. Recessive phenotypes are also observed at sub-confluent growth; cathepsin D transport and processing are altered, although enzyme activity is not significantly affected, lysosomal size and distribution are altered, and endocytosis is reduced. In addition, mitochondria are abnormally elongated, cellular ATP levels are decreased, and survival following oxidative stress is reduced.
15588329	To explore JNCL pathogenesis and battenin function, we previously generated a genetically precise JNCL mouse model. Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in mice harbor the ~1 kb common JNCL mutation and express a non-truncated mutant battenin isoform that is detectable with antibodies recognizing C-terminal epitopes. Homozygous Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in mice exhibit a progressive JNCL-like disease, with perinatal onset of subunit c deposition in many <andsystem-candidate> types and later onset of neuronal dysfunction and behavioral deficits [12]. These findings suggest that the major JNCL defect leads to abnormal turnover of mitochondrial subunit c, in a manner that selectively compromises CNS neurons.
15588329	Currently, there is no suitable neuronal <andsystem-candidate> system to investigate the impact of the common JNCL mutation on biological processes. Therefore, we have established cerebellar neuronal precursor cell lines from Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in mice. Homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells exhibit pathological hallmarks of the disease, and a survey of membrane organelles revealed membrane trafficking defects and mitochondrial dysfunction in homozygous mutant CbCln3Δex7/8 cells.
15588329	To generate a precise genetic, neuron-derived JNCL <andsystem-candidate> culture system, we immortalized granule neurons cultured from postnatal day 4 (P4) cerebella of homozygous and heterozygous Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in mice, and wild-type littermates. Primary cell cultures enriched for granule neurons were transduced with retroviral vector bearing a selection cassette and temperature-sensitive tsA58 SV40 large T antigen. Growth in G418 containing medium at the permissive temperature (33°C) allowed for selection and isolation of multiple clonal nestin-positive (Fig. 1a), and GFAP-negative (Fig. 1b), cell lines for each genotype. No genotype specific differences were observed in cellular morphology or doubling time (~46 hours) (data not shown). As expected, SV40 large T antigen expression was rapidly lost and cell division ceased when cells were shifted to the non-permissive temperature (39°C) (data not shown). Upon addition of neuronal differentiation cocktail, precursor cells became neuron-like in morphology and exhibited decreased nestin expression (data not shown) and increased MAP2 and NeuN expression (Fig. 1c,1d), but not expression of the Purkinje marker, calbindin (Fig. 1e).
15588329	Neuronal marker expression in CbCln3+/+ cells Characterization of CbCln3+/+ cells by immunofluorescence with marker antibodies is shown. CbCln3+/+ precursors exhibit nestin expression (a) but not GFAP expression (b), consistent with a neuronal precursor identity. Upon stimulation with a differentiation cocktail (see Methods), CbCln3+/+ cells achieved neuron-like morphology, with rounded <andsystem-candidate> bodies and extension of processes, and MAP2 (c) and NeuN (d) expression was increased. CbCln3+/+ cells are negative for the Purkinje neuron marker calbindin (e). CbCln3+/Δex7/8 and CbCln3Δex7/8/Δex7/8 cell lines exhibited identical marker immunofluorescence results. a, b) 20 × magnification; c, d, e) 40 × magnification.
15588329	RT-PCR of Cln3 mRNA in wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells Cln3 Exon1-forward, Exon 15-reverse RT-PCR products are shown, from total wild-type (+/+) or homozygous mutant (Δex7/8/Δex7/8) brain and <andsystem-candidate> line RNA. Brain and cell line RT-PCR reaction products had identical band patterns on ethidium-bromide stained agarose gels. Wild-type RT-PCR product was a single ~1.6 kb band and mutant products were ~1.6, ~1.5, ~1.4, ~1.35, and ~1.3 kb, representing multiple mutant splice variants.
15588329	Subunit c accumulation in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cerebellar precursor cells a. Subunit c immunostaining and autofluorescence of 7-day confluency-aged wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells is shown. Wild-type cultures (CbCln3+/+) exhibited limited subunit c immunostaining and autofluorescence. However, CbCln3Δex7/8/Δex7/8 cells contained numerous subunit c puncta. Autofluorescence (7 days AF) was also significantly elevated (right panels), although limited overlap with subunit c puncta was observed (arrows). 40 × magnification. b. Immunoblot analysis of subunit c protein at sub-confluency or 7-day confluency incubation is shown. Total protein extracts from sub-confluency wild-type (+/+) and homozygous mutant (Δex7/8/Δex7/8) cultures contained approximately equal levels of subunit c protein (α-sub c). 7-day confluency extract from homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells (Δex7/8/Δex7/8) had elevated levels of subunit c protein (~1.5X), relative to wild-type extract (+/+). Protein levels were normalized to cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV (α-cox4). c. TEM analysis of inclusions in 7-day confluency-aged homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells is shown. A large autophagosome contained by double membrane (arrows) is filled with degenerating mitochondria (Md), electron dense cores (left and right of *) and other smaller vesicular structures. A large electron-dense inclusion, with a lipofuscin (Ln) appearance, is also present. <andsystem-candidate>, mitochondria. 10,000 × magnification.
15588329	We next investigated the basis for subunit c accumulation, testing the hypothesis that cathepsin D is abnormal since it is required for ATP synthase subunit c degradation in the lysosome [13]. We first tested cathepsin D transport and processing in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells and Cln3Δex7/8 mice using anti-cathepsin D antibody that recognizes unprocessed and processed cathepsin D isoforms. Immunostaining of wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells revealed a perinuclear and punctate vesicular cathepsin D distribution, consistent with its transport and processing through the secretory pathway and delivery to the lysosome (Fig. 5a). However, in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells, cathepsin D distribution was less vesicular and more perinuclear-clustered than in wild-type cells. Immunoblots of homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 <andsystem-candidate> and Cln3Δex7/8 tissue extracts also showed altered relative levels of cathepsin D isoforms (Fig. 5b). Cathepsin D isoforms, identified by relative molecular weights, represent the ~45 kDa precursor, the ~43 kDa intermediate single chain form of the enzyme, and the 31 kDa heavy chain of the double-chain form of the mature enzyme [14]. In homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cell and Cln3Δex7/8 tissue extracts, the precursor and heavy chains were reduced, and the single chain was slightly elevated compared to wild-type extracts. The cellular growth media did not contain altered levels of cathepsin D, indicating enzyme secretion was not affected. Heterozygous Cln3Δex7/8 mice and CbCln3Δex7/8 cells were indistinguishable from wild-type, as expected for a recessive disease phenotype (data not shown).
15588329	The abnormal transport and processing of cathepsin D suggested membrane trafficking disruptions in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells; therefore, we surveyed the subcellular distribution and morphology of membrane organelles. Components of the secretory pathway, including the <andsystem-candidate>, cis-Golgi, and trans-Golgi, did not appear altered from wild-type appearance when labeled with the respective markers, protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), GM130, and VVL (data not shown). By contrast, the lysosomal markers, Lysotracker and Lamp 2 had significantly altered signal in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells, versus wild-type cells. Wild-type cells exhibited brightly stained lysosomes that were large and clustered in the perinuclear region whereas homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 lysosomes were lightly stained, smaller vesicles that were more diffusely scattered in the cytoplasm of the cell (Fig. 6). Lamp 1 distribution was also altered, as previously noted (Fig. 3). However, Lamp 1 and Lamp 2 total protein levels were similar in wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells by immunoblot analysis, indicating the altered signal likely reflects dispersed lysosomes or altered localization and/or epitope availability (data not shown). It is noteworthy that Lysotracker dye, which selectively accumulates in acidic compartments, exhibited the most marked reduction in lysosomal labeling. This observation may reflect altered lysosomal pH, an established finding in JNCL [10,15].
15588329	The abnormal transport and processing of cathepsin D suggested membrane trafficking disruptions in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells; therefore, we surveyed the subcellular distribution and morphology of membrane organelles. Components of the secretory pathway, including the ER, cis-Golgi, and trans-Golgi, did not appear altered from wild-type appearance when labeled with the respective markers, protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), GM130, and VVL (data not shown). By contrast, the lysosomal markers, Lysotracker and Lamp 2 had significantly altered signal in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells, versus wild-type cells. Wild-type cells exhibited brightly stained lysosomes that were large and clustered in the perinuclear region whereas homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 lysosomes were lightly stained, smaller vesicles that were more diffusely scattered in the cytoplasm of the <andsystem-candidate> (Fig. 6). Lamp 1 distribution was also altered, as previously noted (Fig. 3). However, Lamp 1 and Lamp 2 total protein levels were similar in wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells by immunoblot analysis, indicating the altered signal likely reflects dispersed lysosomes or altered localization and/or epitope availability (data not shown). It is noteworthy that Lysotracker dye, which selectively accumulates in acidic compartments, exhibited the most marked reduction in lysosomal labeling. This observation may reflect altered lysosomal pH, an established finding in JNCL [10,15].
15588329	Consistent with the altered early endosome marker (EEA1) signal observed by immunostaining (Fig. 3), fluid-phase endocytosis was also altered in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells, as measured by dextran-FITC uptake (Fig. 7). Following a 15-minute incubation in media containing dextran-FITC, wild-type and heterozygote cells displayed brightly stained, large endocytic vesicles that were clustered in the perinuclear region. However, homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells were less brightly stained with most dextran-FITC signal localizing to smaller vesicles scattered throughout the cytoplasm of the <andsystem-candidate>.
15588329	Finally, because subunit c is a mitochondrial protein and its turnover proceeds through autophagic engulfment of mitochondria [13], we analyzed homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 <andsystem-candidate> mitochondrial morphology and function. Mitochondrial distribution in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells was indistinguishable from wild-type and heterozygous cells; however, homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 mitochondria appeared more elongated by grp75 marker immunostaining and TEM analysis (Fig. 8a). 72% of homozygous mutant mitochondria were greater than 0.6 μm in length (range = 0.26 μm to 2.75 μm), while fewer wild-type mitochondria (51%) reached this length (range = 0.15 μm to 2.29 μm). Mitochondrial width was not altered in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells (data not shown). Moreover, compared to wild-type or heterozygous cells, homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells had significantly reduced cellular ATP levels (1.3 fold less, Fig. 8b) and exhibited reduced survival following hydrogen peroxide treatment (~50% of wild-type survival, Fig. 8c), suggesting impaired energy metabolism and oxidative stress response. Taken together, these data support impaired mitochondrial function in homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells.
15588329	Mitochondrial morphology and function in wild-type, heterozygous and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells a. Confocal and TEM micrographs of wild-type and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 mitochondrial morphology are shown. Immunostaining with the inner mitochondrial membrane marker, grp75 (top panels) highlighted elongated mitochondria in homozygous mutant cells (CbCln3Δex7/8/Δex7/8), relative to wild-type mitochondria (CbCln3+/+) (insets, zoom = 2.75x). Mitochondrial distribution was not altered from the wild-type pattern. Elongated homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 mitochondria were also observed by TEM analysis. 60 × magnification. b. Cellular ATP levels in wild-type, heterozygous and homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 precursor cells are shown. Wild-type (open bar) and heterozygous (gray bar) CbCln3Δex7/8 cells contained ~39 μM ATP, while homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells (black bar) contained ~1.3 fold reduced levels of ATP (~30 μM), which was statistically significant in a t-test (p < 0.0001). Wild-type and heterozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cellular ATP levels were not statistically different from each other (p > 0.4). A representative of triplicate experiments is shown (n = 6 in each experiment). c. <andsystem-candidate> survival following 24-hour hydrogen peroxide treatment is shown. Homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells were ~2-fold more sensitive to oxidative stress by hydrogen peroxide treatment. Wild-type (circle) and heterozygous (triangle) CbCln3Δex7/8 cells exhibited ~50% survival rates with 75–100 μM H2O2, whereas homozygous CbCln3Δex7/8 cells (squares) had a ~50% survival rate with 50 μM H2O2. A representative of triplicate experiments is shown (n = 4 in each experiment).
15588329	Nestin (clone Rat 401, 2 μg/ml), Lamp 1 (clone 1D4B, 6 μg/ml), and Lamp 2 (clone Abl-93; 6 μg/ml) monoclonal antibodies were obtained from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, maintained by The University of Iowa, Department of Biological Sciences. Batp1 (1 μg/ml) was previously described [12]. Anti-subunit c antibody (0.7 μg/ml) was kindly provided by Dr. Kominami (Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan). Additional antibodies were as follows: GFAP, 1:2000 (DAKO Corporation); calbindin, 1:5000 (Sigma); NeuN, 10 μg/ml (Chemicon); SV40 T antigen (Pab 101), 2 μg/ml (Santa Cruz Biotechnology); cathepsin D (C-20), 2 μg/ml (Santa Cruz Biotechnology); cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV (cox4), 1:1000 (BD Biosciences Clontech); PDI (H-160), 2 μg/ml (Santa Cruz Biotechnology); GM130, 1 μg/ml (BD Transduction Labs); α-tubulin, 1:15,000 (Sigma); grp75, 1:200 (Stressgen); early endosome antigen-1 (EEA1), 2 μg/ml (Santa Cruz Biotechnology); rab 7, 4 μg/ml (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). All fluorescent secondary antibodies were obtained from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories and HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies were obtained from Amersham Biosciences. Additional <andsystem-candidate> markers were as follows: VVL-biotin, 1:2000 (Vector Laboratories), 10,000 MW dextran-FITC, 1 mg/ml and Lysotracker Red DND-99, 500 nM (Molecular Probes).
15588329	Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in mice have been previously described [12]. Littermate pups from heterozygote crosses were used for primary culture establishment, by previously described methods that yield cerebellar granule neuron-enriched cultures [26]. Postnatal day 4 (P4) cerebella were dissected in Hank's Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS, Sigma), supplemented with 35 mM glucose. Tail biopsies were also collected for genomic DNA isolation and genotypic analysis. Trypsin/EDTA (10 mg/ml, Sigma) and DNase I (100 μg/ml, Sigma), suspended in HBSS, helped dissociate cerebella for primary culture plating onto 0.01% poly-ornithine (Sigma) coated 100 mm dishes. Primary cultures from individual cerebella were cultured overnight at 37°C, 5% CO2, in granule neuron growth media (Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium [DMEM, Gibco BRL #11995-065], 10% fetal bovine serum [Sigma #F-2442], supplemented with 24 mM KCl). Infection was performed the following day with defective retrovirus transducing the temperature-sensitive tsA58/U19 large T antigen and a selection neomycin-resistance cassette [27], as previously described [28]. Following infection, cultures were shifted to the tsA58/U19 permissive growth temperature of 33°C and selection was in the same growth media as above, with 200 μg/ml G418. Conditionally immortalized colonies were isolated 3–9 weeks post-infection and expanded for frozen stocks and further sub-clone isolation. Multiple clonal lines were obtained for each genotype and all phenotypes were confirmed in at least 2 independent CbCln3 <andsystem-candidate> lines. CbCln3 cell lines were maintained on 0.01% poly-ornithine coated dishes at 30–90% confluency, in 33°C and 5% CO2 atmosphere. Passage number was recorded (up to ~20 passages), but had no apparent impact on phenotype. Neuronal differentiation was as previously described [29] with the following cocktail: 10 ng/ml α-FGF, 250 μM IBMX, 200 nM TPA, 50 μM forskolin, 5 μM dopamine (Sigma).
15588329	Genomic DNA was extracted from tail biopsies and <andsystem-candidate> pellets as described (Cotman et al., 2002). Cln3Δex7/8 knock-in allele PCR genotyping was with wild-type primers, WtF (5'-CAGCATCTCCTCAGGGCTA-3') and WtR (5'-CCAACATAGAAAGTAGGGTGTGC-3') to yield a ~250 bp band and knock-in primers, 552F (5'-GAGCTTTGTTCTGGTTGCCTTC-3') and Ex9RA (5'-GCAGTCTCTGCCTCGTTTTCT-3') to yield a ~500 bp band. PCR cycling conditions were 95°C for 30 seconds, 58°C for 30 seconds, and 72°C for 35 seconds, repeated for 34 cycles. Total RNA isolation and Cln3 RT-PCR primers and procedures have been previously described [12].
15588329	Cells were seeded into 4-well chamber-slides (Falcon) at a density of 5 × 104 cells per well for microscopy studies, or into 100 mm dishes (Falcon) at a density of 5 × 105 cells per dish for protein extraction. Cells were typically >95% confluent one day post-plating, and the following day was considered 1-day post-confluency. At the indicated times, cells were either fixed with 4% formaldehyde in phosphate buffered saline (PBS), pH 7.4, for 20 minutes and processed for autofluorescence/subunit c immunostaining, or <andsystem-candidate> pellets were collected for total protein extraction.
15588329	Total proteins were isolated from <andsystem-candidate> pellets by extraction with ice-cold 20 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 1% Triton X-100 (membrane-research grade, Roche), plus protease inhibitors (Complete mini tablet, 0.7 μg/ml pepstatin A, 2 μg/ml aprotinin, 5 μg/ml leupeptin [Roche]). Following homogenization through a 25-gauge needle (~10 passes), extracts were centrifuged at 1000 × g for 10 minutes, at 4°C, to remove debris. Typically, 20–40 μg of protein (determined by Bio-rad Dc Protein Assay) was separated by SDS-PAGE, for subsequent immunoblotting, as described [12]. 16.5% tris-tricine SDS-PAGE gels were used for subunit c immunoblotting experiments.
15588329	ATP was measured by using the CellTiter-GLO® Luminescent <andsystem-candidate> Viability kit (Promega), according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Briefly, cells were plated in a black opaque-walled 96 well plate (Packard Bioscience) at a density of 20000/well and incubated at 33°C overnight. The following day, CellTiter-GLO® Reagent was added to each well and cell lysis was induced by mixing 2 minutes. An ATP standard curve was prepared in the same plate. Before recording luminescence with a microplate luminometer (MicroLumat Plus LB 96V, Berthold Techonologies), the plate was dark adapted for 10 minutes at room temperature to stabilize the luminescence signal.
15588329	ATP was measured by using the CellTiter-GLO® Luminescent Cell Viability kit (Promega), according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Briefly, cells were plated in a black opaque-walled 96 well plate (Packard Bioscience) at a density of 20000/well and incubated at 33°C overnight. The following day, CellTiter-GLO® Reagent was added to each well and <andsystem-candidate> lysis was induced by mixing 2 minutes. An ATP standard curve was prepared in the same plate. Before recording luminescence with a microplate luminometer (MicroLumat Plus LB 96V, Berthold Techonologies), the plate was dark adapted for 10 minutes at room temperature to stabilize the luminescence signal.
15588329	Cells were plated at a density of 10,000 cells/well in 96-well plates and incubated at 33°C overnight. The following day, fresh media containing varying concentrations of hydrogen peroxide was dispersed to each well. Cells were incubated in the presence of hydrogen peroxide for 24 hours, at 33°C, and viability was measured using the CellTiter-96® AQueous Non-Radioactive <andsystem-candidate> Proliferation Assay (Promega), according to the manufacturer's specifications.
15588329	EF participated in establishment and characterization of <andsystem-candidate> lines and performed ATP determinations. PW participated in mitochondrial analysis and immunocytochemistry. JE, TL-N, AMT, and HG participated in genotypic and additional phenotypic analysis of cell lines. DR and EC generated virus-conditioned medium for conditional immortalization of cells. MEM co-conceived of the study and assisted on drafting of the manuscript. SLC co-conceived of the study, participated in establishment and phenotypic analysis of cell lines, and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
15876356	ADAM22 is a member of the ADAM gene family, but the fact that it is expressed only in the nervous systems makes it unique. ADAM22's sequence similarity to other ADAMs suggests it to be an integrin binder and thus to have a role in <andsystem-candidate>-cell or cell-matrix interactions. To elucidate the physiological functions of ADAM22, we employed gene targeting to generate ADAM22 knockout mice.
15876356	ADAM (A Disintegrin And Metalloprotease) is a family of membrane-spanning multi-domain proteins containing a metalloproteinase-like domain and a disintegrin-like domain. Currently, more than 30 ADAMs have been identified in mammals. Their biological activities implicate ADAMs in fertilization, myogenesis and neurogenesis by proteolysis and adhesion. Some types of ADAM are catalytically active metalloproteases and shed the extracellular domains of membrane-bound growth factors or receptors [1,2]. For example, ADAM17 (TACE) has been shown to cleave several substrates, including tumour necrosis factor alpha[3,4], heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor [6,7] and transforming growth factor alpha [8]. Studies of ADAM17-null mice have revealed that ADAM17 is critical in embryogenesis and plays an essential role in the supply of growth factors [6,8]. ADAMs are also involved in <andsystem-candidate>-cell or cell-matrix adhesion through their interaction with integrins or syndecans. More than 10 ADAMs have been shown to support integrin-mediated cell adhesion in vitro [9]. It has been reported that ADAM2-null and ADAM3-null male mutants are infertile and their spermatozoa lack egg-binding abilities [10-12]. Both ADAM2 and ADAM3 are not metalloproteases because they lack catalytic site sequences in their metalloprotease domain. These studies clearly showed that non-proteinase members of ADAMs also have significant roles in vivo.
15876356	We have reported the findings of ADAM11, ADAM22 and ADAM23 genes and their restricted expression in the human and murine nervous systems [13-15]. Sequence analysis suggests that they are not metalloproteases, since they all lack a catalytic motif. It has been reported that ADAM23 protein is localised to the <andsystem-candidate> surface [16], interacts with alpha-v beta-3 integrin heterodimer [17] and the disruption of ADAM23 gene in the mouse results in premature death associated with ataxia and tremor [18]. Although the cause of death in this mouse is unknown, for these phenotypes, impaired cell-cell or cell-matrix interactions in the nervous system caused by loss of ADAM23 may be responsible. ADAM22 and ADAM23 share highly homologous sequences in their extracellular domains. Especially, it is evident in their putative integrin binding loop sequences, CR(E/D)AVN(E/D)CD, which is located centre of the disintegrin domain. These findings led us to hypothesize that ADAM22 is an integrin binder and plays an important role in the nervous system, as does ADAM23. To determine the physiological functions of ADAM22, we generated and analysed Adam22 gene-targeted mice.
15876356	Based on the mRNA distribution pattern, we performed immunohistopathological analysis of the cerebellum and hippocampus extensively. Despite the high level of expression of ADAM22 mRNAs in the cerebellar granule cells, granule <andsystem-candidate> layer was normally formed and Purkinje cell morphology (calbindin-staining) of the mutant mouse looked intact (Figs. 4A–D). Hippocampal formation was also normally formed (Figs. 4I–J). These results suggest that neuronal cell migration was not impaired in the mutant mouse. Myelin-formation detected by MBP (myelin basic protein) staining of the mutant in the cerebellum (Fig. 4H) and spinal cord (Fig. 4L) was also indistinguishable with the wild-type littermate (Figs. 4G,K). In summary, we could not find any signs of abnormalities in the mutant mouse brain by the light microscopic examination.
15876356	Next, the spinal cord and peripheral nerves of each genotype were analysed by toluidine blue stain, which reveals myelin formation. Surprisingly, lack of myelin or thin myelin was observed in the sciatic nerves (Fig. 5B) and trigeminal nerves (Fig. 5D) in homozygous mutants. Because no lesions were observed in the spinal cord (Fig. 5F), it was suggested that Schwann <andsystem-candidate> specific myelination defect occurred in the homozygous mice. To analyse the state of myelinating Schwann cells and axons, electron microscopic (EM) analysis of the sciatic nerve was performed (Fig. 6). Schwann cells formed thin or no myelin in the homozygous mutant (Fig. 6B). In contrast, heterozygous mice showed complete myelination (Fig. 6A). Morphology of the axons looked normal in each genotype. Immunohistochemical analysis of the sciatic nerve showed that increased number of nuclei (Fig. 7B) and reduced staining of MBP (Fig. 7D) were remarkable in the homozygous mutant. The Schwann cell marker, S100 staining signal was intensely observed in the homozygote as well as wild-type (Figs. 7E, F). These results suggest that proliferation of the Schwann cells was not impaired but differentiation is severely delayed in the ADAM22-deficient mice.
15876356	In the case of human ADAM22, isolation of five splicing variants and existence of two terminating exons have been reported [13,20,21]. However, the latter terminating exon (exon 31) of the mouse species has not been identified yet. To isolate the long form of mouse ADAM22 transcripts, at first, we sought the mouse genome by BLAST homology search. Search results showed that the mouse genome contig NT_039297 contained most of the mouse Adam22 gene. In this contig sequence, we found putative exons 30 and 31, those sequences were quite similar to human ADAM22 isoform 1 (GenBank # NM_021723). To confirm existence of transcripts, we designed primers on the putative exon 31 and performed RT-PCR using mouse cerebellum mRNA as a template. TA-cloning of the amplified fragments and sequencing analysis showed that 5 of 8 clones were type 1 isoform (G01), 2 clones were type 3 isoform (G03) and 1 clone (G08) contained a novel exon between exons 29 and 30. Next, we performed RT-PCR analysis of mRNAs purified from several adult mouse tissues, such as the spinal cord, dorsal root ganglion (DRG), sciatic nerve and cultured primary Schwann cells. Interestingly, multiple DNA fragments were amplified from each tissue (Fig. 8), and length of major fragments in each lane was different. For example, length of major amplified PCR fragments from the sciatic nerve (Fig. 8A, lane 5) and cultured Schwann cells (lane 6) were almost identical, and were shorter than those from other tissues. In contrast, major fragments from the DRG (lane 4) were longer than others. We performed TA-cloning and sequencing to analyse exon organization of the amplified transcripts (Fig. 8C). Forty seven clones were isolated in total and were classified in 16 independent clones (G01 – G23). Comparison with the genomic sequence revealed the existence of 8 novel exons (exons 27S, 27L, 29.1, 29.3, 29.5, 29.7, 30 and 31). These novel exons were flanked by well-defined introns that obey the GT-AG rule. Exon organization of each clone was shown in Fig. 8C. Characteristic feature of ADAM22 transcripts is tissue specific insertion or skipping of exons. Because the number of nucleotides of exons 26, 27, 27L, 29.3, 29.5 and 29.7 is a multiple of 3, insertion or skipping of these exons will not change the downstream reading frame. Known peptide motives were not found in the newly isolated sequences. This RT-PCR analysis is summarized as follows: ADAM22 transcripts were roughly subdivided in 3 groups, CNS-form (containing exon 27), DRG-form (containing exon 27L) and Schwann-<andsystem-candidate>-form (skipping exon 26 and 27). From these results, we concluded that ADAM22 is expressed in a cell-type specific manner, and plays an essential role in myelinogenesis in the PNS.
15876356	In the present study, we examined the function of ADAM22 by generating mice that lacked the Adam22 gene. ADAM22-deficient mice exhibited severe ataxia and premature death. In contrast, heterozygous mutants were healthy, fertile and survived more than 1 year without obvious abnormalities. The cause of death in the homozygous mutants is not clear; however, it is likely to be due to multiple seizures. This is because convulsive seizures were occasionally observed in homozygotes, after which the suffered mice appeared exhausted and, in most cases, died on the next day. It is known that cortical dysplasia resulting from aberrant brain development causes seizure syndrome [22]. For example, mice lacking the neuron-specific activator of cyclin 5, p35, exhibit seizures and a severe neuronal migration defect [23]. Because ADAM22 protein is expressed on the <andsystem-candidate> surface and is likely to be involved in cell-cell or cell-matrix interactions, we hypothesized that depletion of ADAM22 would generate aberrant neuronal migration. Histochemical analysis was performed to verify this hypothesis. However, no marked abnormalities were observed in the mutant mouse brain, ruling out a critical role for ADAM22 in neuronal migration. Another possible explanation is that the premature death in first 2 weeks of life is caused by the dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system. Especially, nerves which control the breathing would be very important, because the respiration system undergoes significant maturation in the first 2–3 weeks after birth. For example, the myelin-deficient (MD) rat, which carries a point mutation in the proteolipid protein (PLP) gene, exhibits ataxia, tremor, dysmyelination and dies at approximately postnatal day 21. In MD rat, early death is caused by the dysfunction of the brain stem which is essential for autonomic control of respiration during hypoxia [24]. Further study is needed to verify the cause of death in ADAM22-deficient mice.
15876356	Another interesting phenotype observed in ADAM22-deficient mice was hypomyelinogenesis. Histopathological analysis revealed marked hypomyelination in the sciatic and trigeminal nerves. However, myelin formation in the spinal cord and the brain was normal. It was therefore evident that hypomyelinogenesis occurred specifically in the peripheral nerves in the knockout mice, suggesting Schwann <andsystem-candidate> dysfunction. In the mutant sciatic nerve, the density of pro-myelinating Schwann cells (S100-positive, MBP-negative) was markedly higher than that seen in heterozygotes. Higher pro-myelinating Schwann cell density and marked delay in myelin formation indicate that ADAM22 plays an important role in Schwann cell differentiation, but not in proliferation.
15876356	Investigations on why hypomyelinogenesis occurred in ADAM22-deficient mice centre on integrin. This is because several ADAMs have been shown to interact with integrins via disintegrin domains [9], and it has been suggested that alpha-6 beta-1 integrin on the Schwann <andsystem-candidate> plays an important role in myelin formation [25]. In addition, laminin-2 is a key player in peripheral myelin formation, because laminin-2 deficiency causes dysmyelination in mice and humans, and its receptors, alpha-6 beta-1 integrin and dystroglycan, are also shown to be deeply involved in myelin formation [26,27]. The conditional knockout studies of beta-1 integrin and laminin gamma-1 in Schwann cell suggested that both laminin-2 and integrins are essential for segregation of large bundles of axons in the early stage of myelin formation [25,28]. In contrast, the phenotype seen in the ADAM22-deficient mice was quite different: for example, unsorted bundles of axons were not seen in nerves and roots. We assume that ADAM22 partially modulates integrin-mediated signals or is involved at a later stage of myelin formation.
15876356	The linearised targeting vector was electroporated into TT2 embryonic stem (ES) cells [31]. Homologous recombinants were selected by PCR. The extracted genomic DNA from each clone was amplified using the forward primer AGN2: 5'-GCCTGCTTGCCGAATATCATGGTGGAAAAT-3' in the PGKneo cassette, and the reverse primer MFP065R: 5'-ACTATTTCTGTGATGAGGGCACAGCATC-3' outside the targeting vector. Homologous recombined DNA was efficiently amplified by 35 cycles of the following amplification steps (94°C-30 s and 68°C-5 min). The targeting efficiency of this construct was about 4%. Correctly targeted ES clones were injected into fertilized ICR mouse eggs at the eight-<andsystem-candidate> stage. The resulting male chimeras were mated with C57BL/6N females, and heterozygous male and female mice were interbred to generate homozygous mice. The ataxic phenotypes of homozygous mice were observed in two independent lines.
15876356	The absence of ADAM22 protein in the Adam22 -/- mice was confirmed by Western blot analysis. Briefly, the cerebellum was isolated from a P14.5 mouse of each genotype and homogenized with a Polytron homogenizer in <andsystem-candidate> lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, Complete protease inhibitors [Roche Diagnostics]). After removal of cell debris by centrifugation, the supernatant was separated on 10% SDS-PAGE, and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. The blot was then incubated with polyclonal antibody against the cytoplasmic domain of ADAM22 (at 1:1,000). Bound antibodies were visualized with horseradish peroxidase-labelled second antibody and a ECL-plus chemiluminescence detection system (Amersham Biosciences Corp.).
16362077	The Src substrate associated in mitosis of 68 kDa (Sam68) is a KH-type RNA binding protein that has been shown to regulate several aspects of RNA metabolism; however, its physiologic role has remained elusive. Herein we report the generation of Sam68-null mice by homologous recombination. Aged Sam68−/− mice preserved their bone mass, in sharp contrast with 12-month-old wild-type littermates in which bone mass was decreased up to approximately 75%. In fact, the bone volume of the 12-month-old Sam68−/− mice was virtually indistinguishable from that of 4-month-old wild-type or Sam68−/− mice. Sam68−/− bone marrow stromal cells had a differentiation advantage for the osteogenic pathway. Moreover, the knockdown of Sam68 using short hairpin RNA in the embryonic mesenchymal multipotential progenitor C3H10T1/2 cells resulted in more pronounced expression of the mature osteoblast marker osteocalcin when differentiation was induced with bone morphogenetic protein-2. Cultures of mouse embryo fibroblasts generated from Sam68+/+ and Sam68−/− littermates were induced to differentiate into adipocytes with culture medium containing pioglitazone and the Sam68−/− mouse embryo fibroblasts shown to have impaired adipocyte differentiation. Furthermore, in vivo it was shown that sections of bone from 12-month-old Sam68−/− mice had few marrow adipocytes compared with their age-matched wild-type littermate controls, which exhibited fatty bone marrow. Our findings identify endogenous Sam68 as a positive regulator of adipocyte differentiation and a negative regulator of osteoblast differentiation, which is consistent with Sam68 being a modulator of bone marrow mesenchymal <andsystem-candidate> differentiation, and hence bone metabolism, in aged mice.
16362077	Osteoporosis is a debilitating bone disease that is characterized by reduced bone mass and microarchitectural damage, which result in increased bone fragility and susceptibility to fracture. Peak bone mass, which is achieved by the age of 30 in humans, has been identified as a major determinant of resistance or susceptibility to osteoporosis. The authors generated mice deficient for the Sam68 RNA binding protein, a protein of unknown physiologic function. The mice develop normally and are protected against bone loss during aging. Age-related bone loss has long been associated with an increase in marrow adipocytes, which are derived from the same mesenchymal lineage as osteoblasts in bone marrow. The authors showed that Sam68 regulates the differentiation of this mesenchymal lineage, such that in its absence, osteoblasts continued to be generated in aging bone, leading to preservation of bone mass. This study identifies a physiologic role for Sam68 as a modulator of the bone marrow stem <andsystem-candidate> niche and hence of bone metabolism. The data identify Sam68 as a potential therapeutic target for the prevention and treatment of age-related bone loss.
16362077	During skeletal development, the anabolic activity of osteoblasts [1] is favored over the catabolic activity of osteoclasts [2], which results in a net gain in bone mass. At skeletal maturity, bone mass is maintained through the balanced activity of osteoblasts and osteoclasts during the remodeling cycle. During skeletal aging, there is a shift in the balance that favors osteoclast over osteoblast activity, which results in net bone loss [3]. The amount and rate at which bone is gained during development and lost during aging are determined in large part by genetics [4–6] but also by physical activity and by alterations in the availability and response of bone cells to circulating hormones [7–9] and locally derived growth factors [10,11]. Whereas genetic-based studies have provided novel insights into the pathways that regulate bone development [12–14], relatively little is known about the etiology of age-related bone loss. Increased bone resorption in elderly men and women is associated with a reduction in bone mass and an increase in circulating levels of bone biomarkers [15]. These changes have been attributed primarily to nutritional deficits resulting in alterations in the parathyroid hormone–vitamin D axis [16], to gonadal hormone deficiency [17], to leptin levels and the sympathetic nervous system [8,18–20], and to alterations in bone <andsystem-candidate> apoptosis [21]. Bone loss in the elderly has also been attributed to alterations in the response of bone marrow stromal cells to their microenvironment that favors differentiation down the adipocyte lineage rather than the osteoblast lineage [22].
16362077	Aging has long been associated with an increase in marrow fat, where the generation of adipocytes is favored over osteoblasts [23]. Osteoblasts and adipocytes are derived from a common mesenchymal precursor <andsystem-candidate> present in bone marrow, and the factors that control this age-induced switch toward adipogenic differentiation is not well understood [24]. While several transcriptional regulatory proteins have been associated with cell fate determination of bone marrow mesenchymal cells, including peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor γ (PPARγ) and KLF5 [25–30], the role of RNA binding proteins in this process remains unknown. RNA binding proteins of the KH type are known regulators of cellular differentiation. For example, expression defects in the KH domain proteins NOVA and FMRP are known to cause paraneoplastic neurologic disorders [31] and the fragile X syndrome, respectively, in humans [32]. The phenotype of the quaking viable mice suggests a role for the QUAKING RNA binding protein in oligodendrocytes and myelination [33]. Indeed, the ectopic expression of the QKI-6/7 isoforms in vivo led to the formation of glial cells rather than neurons from neural progenitor, demonstrating its role in cell fate determination [34]. The loss of GLD-1 protein in Caenorhabditis elegans prevents the appearance of stem cells [35], and the absence of the KH domain protein HOW in Drosophila prevents muscle differentiation and results in flies with held-out-wings [36,37]. The Src substrate associated in mitosis of 68 kDa (Sam68) is also a member of the family of KH domain RNA binding proteins [38]; however, its physiologic role has remained undefined.
16362077	Aging has long been associated with an increase in marrow fat, where the generation of adipocytes is favored over osteoblasts [23]. Osteoblasts and adipocytes are derived from a common mesenchymal precursor cell present in bone marrow, and the factors that control this age-induced switch toward adipogenic differentiation is not well understood [24]. While several transcriptional regulatory proteins have been associated with cell fate determination of bone marrow mesenchymal cells, including peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor γ (PPARγ) and KLF5 [25–30], the role of RNA binding proteins in this process remains unknown. RNA binding proteins of the KH type are known regulators of cellular differentiation. For example, expression defects in the KH domain proteins NOVA and FMRP are known to cause paraneoplastic neurologic disorders [31] and the fragile <andsystem-candidate> syndrome, respectively, in humans [32]. The phenotype of the quaking viable mice suggests a role for the QUAKING RNA binding protein in oligodendrocytes and myelination [33]. Indeed, the ectopic expression of the QKI-6/7 isoforms in vivo led to the formation of glial cells rather than neurons from neural progenitor, demonstrating its role in cell fate determination [34]. The loss of GLD-1 protein in Caenorhabditis elegans prevents the appearance of stem cells [35], and the absence of the KH domain protein HOW in Drosophila prevents muscle differentiation and results in flies with held-out-wings [36,37]. The Src substrate associated in mitosis of 68 kDa (Sam68) is also a member of the family of KH domain RNA binding proteins [38]; however, its physiologic role has remained undefined.
16362077	Sam68 was identified as an SH3 and SH2 domain interacting protein for Src family kinases and is also a known substrate of Src kinases [39–42] and of the breast tumor kinase [43]. Sam68 has been shown to facilitate the export of unspliced HIV RNA [44] and to regulate pre-mRNA processing [45]. In the present paper, we report the generation of Sam68−/− mice and analysis of their skeletal phenotype. Our data indicate that the absence of Sam68 confers resistance to age-related bone loss in mice such that old Sam68 have a higher bone mass than their wild-type littermates. We provide evidence that Sam68 regulates the differentiation of bone marrow stromal cells by showing that cells isolated from Sam68−/− animals had enhanced osteogenic activity and decreased adipogenic activity than those harvested from wild-type littermates. Furthermore, Sam68−/− mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) were impaired in their capacity to differentiate into adipocytes, consistent with Sam68 being a regulator of bone marrow mesenchymal <andsystem-candidate> differentiation. These results also characterize a new animal model to study bone metabolism, regeneration, and repair during aging.
16362077	To further examine this phenotype in a <andsystem-candidate> autonomous system, we chose the embryonic mesenchymal multipotential progenitor cells C3H10T1/2. The addition of BMP-2 induced osteoblast differentiation, as evidenced by an approximately 400-fold increase in expression of the osteocalcin (OCN) gene [51]. Populations of C3H10T1/2 cells stably transfected with either pSuper-retro (control) and pSuper-retro harboring a short hairpin against Sam68 (Sam68sh) were selected with puromycin. The expression of Sam68 was reduced by approximately 80% as evidenced by immunoblot analyses using β-actin as a loading control (Figure 8A). Osteoblast differentiation was induced in cultures expressing pSuper-retro or pSuper-retro Sam68sh by addition of BMP-2 to the culture medium. . The expression of OCN and β-actin mRNAs was examined by semiquantitative RT-PCR and the Sam68sh-expressing cells displayed a more pronounced osteoblast phenotype compared with control cells, as assessed by the expression of OCN (Figure 8B).
16362077	Ex vivo differentiation of primary bone marrow stromal cells, harvested from Sam68+/+ and Sam68−/− mice, down the osteoblast lineage revealed an osteogenic advantage in the cultures of cells derived from the Sam68−/− mice. It will be important to demonstrate that a similar effect is observed using primary bone marrow stromal cells from aged Sam68−/− mice. Similar findings were observed when embryonic mesenchymal multipotential progenitor cells C3H10T1/2 treated with Sam68 shRNA, were differentiated into osteoblasts with BMP2. Our findings that aged Sam68−/− mice do not develop fatty bone marrow and that MEFs derived from Sam68 −/− mice have impaired adipocyte differentiation, indicate that Sam68 regulates both adipocyte and osteoblast differentiation. These findings identify Sam68 as the first RNA binding protein to regulate mesenchymal <andsystem-candidate> differentiation and the challenge will be to identify the specific RNA targets that it regulates during this process. The fact that osteoblast function is altered in Src−/− mice [60,61] raises the possibility that preservation of bone mass in the Sam68−/− mice could be linked with and regulated by Src.
16362077	In conclusion, our data define a physiologic role for Sam68 in bone metabolism and bone marrow mesenchymal stem <andsystem-candidate> differentiation. The bone phenotype observed in Sam68−/− mice imply that inhibitors of Sam68 could prevent age-related bone loss. Furthermore, the results also suggest that Sam68 expression levels, hypomorphism, and mutations in humans may influence susceptibility to marrow adipocyte accumulation and osteoporosis. Our findings also identify a new animal model to study aging bone loss.
16362077	Osteoclasts were isolated from the crushed long bones of juvenile Sam68+/+ and Sam68−/− mice and used for quantitative studies as described [64]. Briefly, cells were plated on glass coverslips or on dentin slices in 24-well cluster plates for assessment of <andsystem-candidate> number and pit number, respectively. Cover slips were immersed in 4% paraformaldehyde and stained for TRAP activity after 2 h. Dentin slices were left for 28 h before removing the cells with 1 M ammonium hydroxide and air drying before coating with sputter Au-Pd and examination with scanning electron microscopy (McGill Electron Microscopy Centre). Light microscope images were captured using a Leica DMR microscope equipped with a Retiga 1300 camera. Quantitative analyses were performed using Adobe Photoshop and the data presented as the mean ± SD of two or three independent experiments. Statistical comparisons were made using the Student's t test.
16507151	A total of 200 female mice (approximately ten months old) of N2 backcross (B10.Q × NFR/N) × B10.Q were used. The mice had earlier undergone a reproductive study where each animal had four mating opportunities. First, the female mice were allowed to mate twice with B10.RIII males (allogeneic mating by means of <andsystem-candidate> (major histocompatibility complex) and finally to mate twice with B10.Q males (syngeneic mating by means of MHC). After four possible pregnancies CIA was induced to the female mice.
16507151	To induce CIA, the mice were immunized subcutaneously at the base of the tail with 100 μg rat collagen type II (<andsystem-candidate>) emulsified in 0.1 M acetic acid combined with an equal amount of complete Freud's adjuvant (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, MI, USA). A booster injection containing 50 μg CII emulsified in 0.1 M acetic acid combined with an equal amount of Freud's incomplete adjuvant (Difco Laboratories) was given after 30 days. The clinical scoring of arthritis commenced 25 days after the first immunization. Animals were examined for clinical signs of CIA three times per week and were graded on a 12-point scale. The arthritis index was assigned to each mouse using the following criteria: 0 = no visible sign of arthritis, 1 = redness and swelling in a single joint, 2 = inflammation in multiple joints, and 3 = severe inflammation in the entire paw and/or anklebone. Each paw was given the scores 0–3, with the index being the sum of all four paws. The severity trait is the maximum score observed in each individual female. The onset is the number of days calculated from the first immunization to the first clinical signs of arthritis excluding unaffected animals.
16507151	The adult female mice were sacrificed at 15 months of age and sera were collected. Anti-<andsystem-candidate> antibody titers in sera were analyzed by a sandwich ELISA technique [14]. In brief, CII (10 μg/ml) was coupled to immunosorbent plates overnight at 4°C. Bovine serum albumin (Sigma Chemical St Louis, MO, USA) was used for blocking, and thereafter different dilutions of control sera (purified mouse anti-CII antibodies), test sera, and positive and negative controls were added. The presence of CII-specific IgG was visualized by means of peroxidase-conjugated goat antimouse IgG.
16507151	The adult female mice were sacrificed at 15 months of age and sera were collected. Anti-CII antibody titers in sera were analyzed by a sandwich ELISA technique [14]. In brief, CII (10 μg/ml) was coupled to immunosorbent plates overnight at 4°C. Bovine serum albumin (Sigma Chemical St Louis, MO, USA) was used for blocking, and thereafter different dilutions of control sera (purified mouse anti-CII antibodies), test sera, and positive and negative controls were added. The presence of CII-specific <andsystem-candidate> was visualized by means of peroxidase-conjugated goat antimouse IgG.
16507151	The onset of the disease was significantly delayed in NFR/N mice, which resulted in lower incidence in the initial phase of the disease (Table 1 and Figure 1). The appearance of the arthritis was slightly different between the two strains, NFR/N mice showing a higher frequency of swelling of the entire paw than B10.Q mice. Later in the disease course the differences in CIA frequency and severity between the strains were less obvious. However, the anti-<andsystem-candidate> titers 100 days after primary immunization (and 70 days after the booster) differed significantly between NFR/N and B10.Q female mice (see Table 1).
16507151	Table 2 presents the results of arthritic incidence, arthritis onset and maximum arthritic score for the female mice of the N2 generation, (NFR/N × B10.Q) × B10.Q, grouped according to the number of pregnancies they had experienced prior to immunization with <andsystem-candidate>. There was no significant difference in the incidence or severity of arthritis depending on the number of pregnancies that had been passed prior to the induction of the disease. We observed a trend towards lower severity in multiparous mice compared with mice with a history of zero to two pregnancies. The onset of diseases, however, was earlier in mice that had passed more than one pregnancy.
16507151	The genetic linkage analysis revealed one significant quantitative trait locus (QTL) located at 64–70 cM on chromosome 11 (Table 3 and Figure 2). This locus (denoted Cia40) gave significant LOD scores for the traits incidence (LOD = 4.1) and 'day of onset' (LOD = 4.0), and a suggestive LOD score for the trait 'arthritis score' (LOD = 3.3). Another QTL of suggestive significance for the incidence of disease was identified around 27 cM on chromosome 1 (Figure 2). Finally, a suggestive QTL for the trait anti-<andsystem-candidate> antibody titer was identified on chromosome 13 (Figure 2).
16507151	Although carrying the same CIA-susceptible <andsystem-candidate> region, the NFR/N and B10.Q mice are different in several respects. The NFR/N mouse, which is an inbred NMRI mouse of the H-2q haplotype, is larger in size than the B10.Q mouse and is also known for its extraordinarily good breeding properties. The mice used in the present study, (NFR/N × B10.Q) × B10.Q females, first underwent a genetic study of reproduction, in which a number of loci associated with breeding performance were identified (Liljander M, Sällström MA, Andersson S, Wernhoff P, Andersson Å, Holmdahl R, Mattsson R; unpublished data). Since the parental strains differ in susceptibility to CIA, in spite of both having the MHC class II A beta genes [15], we wanted to test the susceptibility to inflammatory disease in mice from this cross. In fact, this situation gave an opportunity to study the genetic control of arthritis in aged multiparous females, a common situation in human RA. This susceptibility was important to investigate for various reasons. The fact that the mice differed in their reproductive history made it possible to analyze whether this would significantly affect the incidence or severity of CIA. Second, almost all the linkage analyses performed for detection of CIA-associated loci in mice have been carried out with male mice. Another reason is that the use of old multiparous mice mimicked the RA situation (older women is the major risk group). Finally, the NFR/N strain had not previously been used in linkage analyses for detection of CIA-associated loci, which opened (up) the possibility of detecting new polymorphic genes of importance in this disease.
16507151	The second conclusion from this study is that loci of possible importance for CIA have been detected, two associated with arthritis susceptibility (chromosomes 1 and 11) and one associated with anti-<andsystem-candidate> titers (chromosome 13). Some arthritis loci have previously been identified on chromosome 1: Cia15 at 8 cM [16], Cia20 at 44 cM [16] and Cia9 at 92 cM [17]. However, none of these loci appears to be close to the locus found on chromosome 1 in the present study. The newly identified Cia40 locus includes the Ctla4 (CD152) gene, which is a strong candidate associated with spontaneous diabetes identified in crosses between C57Bl and nonobese diabetic strains [18]. Analyses of CIA in crosses of the same backgrounds, however, did not identify a linkage to this locus, suggesting that the polymorphism underlying Cia40 differs from the genes associated with diabetes [18]. Interestingly, Bauer and colleagues previously identified a locus (Cia28) associated with anti-CII antibody production at 53 cM on chromosome 13 [19], which is approximately at the same position as where we find the linkage for this trait in the present study. It is therefore most likely that the QTL we have identified on chromosome 13 is the same as Cia28.
16507151	Our results show that multiparity does not negatively influence the incidence or severity of CIA induced later in life. Furthermore, two new loci linked to CIA susceptibility were detected on chromosome 11 (Cia40) and on chromosome 1. We detected on chromosome 13 a locus associated with anti-<andsystem-candidate> titers, which probably is the same as the recently reported Cia28 [19].
16507151	Chromosomal locations of the quantitative trait loci (QTL) for collagen-induced arthritis incidence on chromosomes 1 and 11. QTL for collagen type II (<andsystem-candidate>) antibody titers are illustrated on chromosome 13. *Suggestive level threshold (P = 0.63) according to the permutation test (n = 1,000). ** Significance level threshold (P = 0.05) according to the permutation test (n = 1,000).
17447844	Gametogenesis is a sexually dimorphic process requiring profound differences in germ <andsystem-candidate> differentiation between the sexes. In mammals, the presence of heteromorphic sex chromosomes in males creates additional sex-specific challenges, including incomplete X and Y pairing during meiotic prophase. This triggers formation of a heterochromatin domain, the XY body. The XY body disassembles after prophase, but specialized sex chromatin persists, with further modification, through meiosis. Here, we investigate the function of DMRT7, a mammal-specific protein related to the invertebrate sexual regulators Doublesex and MAB-3. We find that DMRT7 preferentially localizes to the XY body in the pachytene stage of meiotic prophase and is required for male meiosis. In Dmrt7 mutants, meiotic pairing and recombination appear normal, and a transcriptionally silenced XY body with appropriate chromatin marks is formed, but most germ cells undergo apoptosis during pachynema. A minority of mutant cells can progress to diplonema, but many of these escaping cells have abnormal sex chromatin lacking histone H3K9 di- and trimethylation and heterochromatin protein 1β accumulation, modifications that normally occur between pachynema and diplonema. Based on the localization of DMRT7 to the XY body and the sex chromatin defects observed in Dmrt7 mutants, we conclude that DMRT7 plays a role in the sex chromatin transformation that occurs between pachynema and diplonema. We suggest that DMRT7 may help control the transition from meiotic sex chromosome inactivation to postmeiotic sex chromatin in males. In addition, because it is found in all branches of mammals, but not in other vertebrates, Dmrt7 may shed light on evolution of meiosis and of sex chromatin.
17447844	Gametogenesis is a sexually dimorphic process requiring profound differences in germ cell differentiation between the sexes. In mammals, the presence of heteromorphic sex chromosomes in males creates additional sex-specific challenges, including incomplete <andsystem-candidate> and Y pairing during meiotic prophase. This triggers formation of a heterochromatin domain, the XY body. The XY body disassembles after prophase, but specialized sex chromatin persists, with further modification, through meiosis. Here, we investigate the function of DMRT7, a mammal-specific protein related to the invertebrate sexual regulators Doublesex and MAB-3. We find that DMRT7 preferentially localizes to the XY body in the pachytene stage of meiotic prophase and is required for male meiosis. In Dmrt7 mutants, meiotic pairing and recombination appear normal, and a transcriptionally silenced XY body with appropriate chromatin marks is formed, but most germ cells undergo apoptosis during pachynema. A minority of mutant cells can progress to diplonema, but many of these escaping cells have abnormal sex chromatin lacking histone H3K9 di- and trimethylation and heterochromatin protein 1β accumulation, modifications that normally occur between pachynema and diplonema. Based on the localization of DMRT7 to the XY body and the sex chromatin defects observed in Dmrt7 mutants, we conclude that DMRT7 plays a role in the sex chromatin transformation that occurs between pachynema and diplonema. We suggest that DMRT7 may help control the transition from meiotic sex chromosome inactivation to postmeiotic sex chromatin in males. In addition, because it is found in all branches of mammals, but not in other vertebrates, Dmrt7 may shed light on evolution of meiosis and of sex chromatin.
17447844	Gametogenesis is a sexually dimorphic process requiring profound differences in germ cell differentiation between the sexes. In mammals, the presence of heteromorphic sex chromosomes in males creates additional sex-specific challenges, including incomplete X and <andsystem-candidate> pairing during meiotic prophase. This triggers formation of a heterochromatin domain, the XY body. The XY body disassembles after prophase, but specialized sex chromatin persists, with further modification, through meiosis. Here, we investigate the function of DMRT7, a mammal-specific protein related to the invertebrate sexual regulators Doublesex and MAB-3. We find that DMRT7 preferentially localizes to the XY body in the pachytene stage of meiotic prophase and is required for male meiosis. In Dmrt7 mutants, meiotic pairing and recombination appear normal, and a transcriptionally silenced XY body with appropriate chromatin marks is formed, but most germ cells undergo apoptosis during pachynema. A minority of mutant cells can progress to diplonema, but many of these escaping cells have abnormal sex chromatin lacking histone H3K9 di- and trimethylation and heterochromatin protein 1β accumulation, modifications that normally occur between pachynema and diplonema. Based on the localization of DMRT7 to the XY body and the sex chromatin defects observed in Dmrt7 mutants, we conclude that DMRT7 plays a role in the sex chromatin transformation that occurs between pachynema and diplonema. We suggest that DMRT7 may help control the transition from meiotic sex chromosome inactivation to postmeiotic sex chromatin in males. In addition, because it is found in all branches of mammals, but not in other vertebrates, Dmrt7 may shed light on evolution of meiosis and of sex chromatin.
17447844	Genes related to the sexual regulator Doublesex of Drosophila have been found to control sexual development in a wide variety of animals, ranging from roundworms to mammals. In this paper, we investigate the function of the Dmrt7 gene, one of seven related genes in the mouse. Female mammals are XX and males are XY, a chromosomal difference that presents specific challenges during the meiotic phase of male germ <andsystem-candidate> development. Some of these are thought to be overcome by incorporating the X and Y chromosomes into a specialized structure called the XY body. We find that DMRT7 protein is present in germ cells, localizes to the male XY body during meiosis, and is essential for male but not female fertility. The XY body normally is altered by recruitment of additional proteins and by specific modifications to histone proteins between the pachytene and diplotene stages of meiosis, but modification of the “sex chromatin” in Dmrt7 mutant cells is abnormal during this period. Because Dmrt7 is found in all branches of mammals, but not in other vertebrates, these results may indicate some commonality in regulation of sex chromatin among the mammals.
17447844	Vertebrates also have DM domain genes, and analysis to date, although limited, has shown that these genes also control sexual differentiation. Mammals have seven DM domain genes (Dmrt genes), several of which exhibit sexually dimorphic mRNA expression [23,24]. The best studied of these genes, Dmrt1, is expressed in the differentiating male genital ridges and adult testis of mammals, birds, fish, and reptiles, and a recently duplicated Dmrt1 gene functions as the <andsystem-candidate>-linked testis-determining gene in the Medaka fish [25–29]. Human DMRT1 maps to an autosomal locus, which, when hemizygous, is associated with defective testicular development and consequent XY feminization [30]. Similarly, mice homozygous for a null mutation in Dmrt1 have severe defects in testis differentiation involving both germ cells and Sertoli cells [31]. Female mice mutant in Dmrt4 have polyovular follicles, indicating that this gene also plays a role in gonadal development [32]. It appears from these studies that the involvement of DM domain genes in sexual differentiation is ancient and conserved. However, vertebrate Dmrt gene function is not limited to sexual differentiation: Dmrt2 is required in both sexes for segmentation in mice and fish [33–35].
17447844	To investigate DMRT7 protein expression, we generated an antibody against the C-terminal portion of the protein. The antibody was raised against a unique region lacking the DM domain in order to avoid cross-reaction with other DM domain proteins. Immunofluorescent staining with purified DMRT7 antisera showed that DMRT7 protein is expressed predominantly in mid- to late-pachytene spermatocytes (Figure 1C), as well as in sperm, and is not detectable in other germ <andsystem-candidate> types including spermatogonia and round spermatids. We did not detect DMRT7 protein in somatic cells such as Sertoli cells, peritubular myoid cells, or Leydig cells. To more precisely determine the pachytene stages of DMRT7 expression, we double-stained with an antibody to GATA1, which is expressed in Sertoli cells from stages VII to IX [38]. This confirmed that DMRT7 is expressed in mid- to late-pachytene spermatocytes, starting slightly earlier than stage VII and extending through stage IX (unpublished data).
17447844	To establish the functional requirement for Dmrt7, we generated Dmrt7−/− mice by targeted disruption in embryonic stem (ES) cells using a strategy diagrammed in Figure S2A. The Dmrt7 gene has nine exons with the DM domain encoded by the second and third exons. Because the DM domain is essential for function of other genes, including mab-3, mab-23, and dsx [18,19,41], we generated a conditionally targeted “floxed” allele in which the DM domain–containing exons of Dmrt7 are flanked by recognition sites for the Cre recombinase (loxP sites). The targeting vector also contained a neomycin resistance cassette (neo) flanked by Flpe recognition sites. The removal of these sequences by Cre-mediated recombination eliminates the DM domain and the translational start site, thus generating a putative null allele. We identified three homologously targeted ES <andsystem-candidate> clones by Southern blotting (Figure S2B) and injected cells from two clones into C57BL/6 blastocysts. Chimeric animals from both cell lines transmitted the targeted allele through the germ line. Targeted animals were bred to β-actin Cre mice to delete the DM domain–encoding exons, generating the Dmrt7− allele, or to Flpe transgenic mice to delete the neo cassette, generating the Dmrt7flox allele. Dmrt7+/− mice were interbred to generate Dmrt7−/− mice. To confirm the lack of functional DMRT7 protein in Dmrt7−/−testes, we stained meiotic spreads from Dmrt7 mutants (Figure S1) and sections from mutant testes (Figure S2C) and carried out western blot analysis (unpublished data). In each case, we detected no DMRT7 protein in the mutant testes.
17447844	Since Dmrt7 mutant testes lack most post-pachytene cells, we used TUNEL analysis to test whether the missing cells are eliminated by apoptosis. At 3 wk, Dmrt7 mutant testes contain significantly more apoptotic cells than those of wild-type controls. The percentage of tubule sections with five or more apoptotic nuclei was about three times higher in Dmrt7 mutants compared with wild-type (20% versus 7%; Figure 2E). A similar elevation of apoptosis was apparent in mutant testes at 7 wk (Figure 2F). In mutants, many apoptotic cells were in the middle of the tubules, whereas the apoptotic cells in wild-type occur mainly near the seminiferous tubule periphery. The numbers of Sertoli cells were not significantly different between wild-type and mutant testes, and we observed no difference in somatic <andsystem-candidate> apoptosis in mutants (unpublished data). From these results, we conclude that loss of Dmrt7 causes a block in meiotic progression, mainly in pachynema, leading to the elimination, by apoptosis, of the arrested cells.
17447844	To better define the spermatogenic stage at which Dmrt7−/− male germ cells arrest and die, we used antibodies against several stage-specific germ <andsystem-candidate> markers. TRA98 is expressed in PGCs and spermatogonia [43]. In the wild-type adult testis, strongly staining TRA98-positive cells form a layer one cell deep; however, in the mutant TRA98, strongly positive cells were abnormally organized, and some tubules had a layer several cells deep (Figure 3A). The BC7 antibody recognizes spermatocytes in the leptotene to early-pachytene stages [44]. Dmrt7 mutant testes had BC7-positive cells in approximately normal numbers, but again abnormally organized, with many positive cells in the center rather than the periphery of the tubules (Figure 3B). The TRA369 antibody recognizes a calmegin protein expressed in pachytene spermatocytes through elongated spermatids [45]. In contrast to the earlier stages, far fewer TRA369-positive cells were present in mutant testes relative to wild-type (Figure 3C). We also quantitated the number of cells at each meiotic stage using spermatocyte spreads, assaying chromosome-pairing status by staining for SYCP3, a component of the synaptonemal complex (Figure 4). We found that Dmrt7 mutants accumulate pachytene cells but have greatly reduced numbers of cells in late-pachynema and beyond. Together, these results confirm that the meiotic arrest in Dmrt7 mutants occurs primarily during pachynema and results in efficient elimination of arrested cells.
17447844	Sertoli cells interact with germ cells during spermatogenesis and the interaction is critical for germ <andsystem-candidate> maturation [50]. Although we did not detect DMRT7 expression in Sertoli cells by antibody staining, we nevertheless considered the possibility that Sertoli cell defects might contribute to the male-specific germ line failure of Dmrt7 mutants. To characterize Sertoli cell differentiation, we examined expression of the Sertoli cell markers GATA4 (a marker of immature postnatal Sertoli cells) and GATA1 (a mature Sertoli cell marker). The levels of these proteins appeared normal relative to wild-type at P14 and P42 (Figure 6A–6C), as did the androgen receptor (Figure S3; unpublished data). However, the organization of Sertoli cells in Dmrt7 mutant testes was abnormal: in some tubules GATA1-positive Sertoli cell nuclei were displaced from their usual close apposition with the basement membrane (Figure 6C). In such tubules, nuclei of pre-meiotic germ cells and spermatocytes were packed close to the basal membrane and few germ cells were found in the adlumenal region.
17447844	(C) Wild-type and mutant testis sections double-stained with antibody to GATA1 (red) and DAPI (blue). Most Sertoli <andsystem-candidate> nuclei were adjacent to the basal membrane in wild-type, but mutant Sertoli cells were displaced in some tubules (arrowhead). White dotted line indicates position of basal membranes.
17447844	(E) Testis sections from 10-wk-old wild-type and SC-Dmrt7KO mice stained with antibodies to GATA1 (red) and smooth muscle actin (to outline seminiferous tubules; green). Sertoli <andsystem-candidate> nuclei are positioned normally near the basal membrane in SC-Dmrt7KO mice.
17447844	The aberrant Sertoli <andsystem-candidate> organization in Dmrt7 mutant testes raised the possibility that the germ cell phenotype might indirectly result from defects in Sertoli cell function. To test this possibility, we deleted Dmrt7 just in the Sertoli cell lineage by crossing mice carrying the floxed Dmrt7 allele with Dhh-Cre transgenic mice [51]. The Desert hedgehog (Dhh) promoter is active starting at about E12.5 in pre-Sertoli cells but not in germ cells, allowing deletion of Dmrt7 in Sertoli cells well before any likely requirement for its function [52]. Testicular size in Sertoli-targeted (SC-Dmrt7KO) animals was slightly reduced from that of wild-type, but histological analysis revealed no obvious difference between wild-type and SC-Dmrt7KO testes (Figure 6D). Spermatogenesis appeared normal, mature sperm were present, and SC-Dmrt7KO mice were fertile. In addition, GATA1 staining showed that Sertoli cell nuclei were located adjacent to the basement membrane as in wild-type (Figure 6E). These results suggest the germ cell defects of Dmrt7 mutants are not caused by lack of Dmrt7 in Sertoli cells. Rather, the abnormal organization of Sertoli cells appears to result from lack of Dmrt7 in the germ line.
17447844	Although the XY body can form during pachynema in Dmrt7 mutants, we considered the possibility that transcriptional silencing might not be properly established. This would be consistent with the Dmrt7 phenotype: pachytene cells that escape from MSCI normally are eliminated prior to late-pachytene [17]. Recently, MSCI has been shown to continue into meiosis II and spermiogenesis, apparently mediated by a distinct chromatin compartment termed postmeiotic sex chromatin (PMSC) that is established starting in diplonema [16]. We therefore asked whether the pachytene germ <andsystem-candidate> death in Dmrt7 mutants is associated with a failure either to initiate or to maintain sex chromosome inactivation.
17447844	First, we examined the mid-pachytene XY body. To examine XY transcriptional status, we carried out Cot-1 RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to detect nascent RNA polymerase II transcription, combined with DAPI staining to locate the XY body on spreads of seminiferous tubules (Figure 8A and 8B). In Dmrt7 mutants, the XY body was formed and excluded Cot-1 hybridization (Figure 8B), indicating that transcriptional silencing is established normally in mutant pachytene cells. We also examined expression of the <andsystem-candidate>-linked gene Rbmy, which normally is inactivated during pachytene and reactivated after secondary meiosis begins [54,55]. Rbmy was inactivated normally in pachytene cells of Dmrt7 mutants, based on immunofluorescent staining with an anti-RBMY antibody (Figure S5). We also examined heterochromatin protein 1 beta (HP1β), which normally localizes to the X centromere at mid-pachynema and then spreads through the XY body as it internalizes during diplonema [56]. We found that HP1β localization is normal in DMRT7 mutant cells in mid-pachynema (Figure 8C and 8D). These results suggest that XY body formation and initiation of MSCI both occur normally in Dmrt7 mutant germ cells.
17447844	First, we examined the mid-pachytene XY body. To examine XY transcriptional status, we carried out Cot-1 RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to detect nascent RNA polymerase II transcription, combined with DAPI staining to locate the XY body on spreads of seminiferous tubules (Figure 8A and 8B). In Dmrt7 mutants, the XY body was formed and excluded Cot-1 hybridization (Figure 8B), indicating that transcriptional silencing is established normally in mutant pachytene cells. We also examined expression of the Y-linked gene Rbmy, which normally is inactivated during pachytene and reactivated after secondary meiosis begins [54,55]. Rbmy was inactivated normally in pachytene cells of Dmrt7 mutants, based on immunofluorescent staining with an anti-RBMY antibody (Figure S5). We also examined heterochromatin protein 1 beta (HP1β), which normally localizes to the <andsystem-candidate> centromere at mid-pachynema and then spreads through the XY body as it internalizes during diplonema [56]. We found that HP1β localization is normal in DMRT7 mutant cells in mid-pachynema (Figure 8C and 8D). These results suggest that XY body formation and initiation of MSCI both occur normally in Dmrt7 mutant germ cells.
17447844	A number of other proteins have been identified that interact with the XY body, including histone variants and modified histones, a testis-specific histone methyl transferase, chromobox proteins, an orphan receptor germ-<andsystem-candidate> nuclear factor, and recombination-related proteins [60]. A common feature of these proteins is involvement with heterochromatin and/or transcriptional repression. DMRT7 is unusual among XY body proteins in being related to highly site-specific transcriptional regulators. An attractive speculation is that DMRT7 may provide sequence specificity in recruiting other proteins, such as chromatin modifiers, to the XY body as part of the transition to PMSC. Chromatin regulation may be a common mechanism for DM domain proteins, as we find that other DM domain proteins associate with chromatin modifying complexes (M. W. Murphy, D. Zarkower, and V. J. Bardwell, unpublished data).
17447844	The finding that Dmrt7 is essential for mammalian meiosis expands the known functions of this gene family. Invertebrate DM domain genes so far have only been found to function in somatic cells. Two other DM domain genes, Dmrt1 and Dmrt4, do affect germ <andsystem-candidate> development in the mouse. Dmrt1 is required in pre-meiotic male germ cells for differentiation of gonocytes into spermatogonia, as well as in Sertoli cells, but it is not expressed in meiotic cells [31] (S. Kim and D. Zarkower, unpublished data). The requirement for DMRT1 in pre-meiotic germ cells and DMRT7 in meiotic germ cells demonstrates that DM domain proteins act at multiple critical points of male germ cell development. Ovaries of Dmrt4 mutant females have polyovular follicles (follicles containing multiple oocytes), but it is unknown whether this reflects a defect in the germ line or the soma. It is notable that at least three mammalian DM domain genes affect gonadal development only in one sex, given the similar roles of related proteins in directing sex-specific somatic development in other phyla.
17447844	pDZ169 was linearized with PmeI and electroporated into CJ7 ES cells (originally derived from the 129S1 strain). Three homologous recombinants were identified from 296 G418-resistant colonies by Southern hybridization by use of a DNA probe from the sequences upstream of exon 1 to screen genomic DNA digested with EcoRI. Homologous recombination was confirmed on both ends of the targeted region by Southern hybridization. Probes for Southern hybridization were made by PCR using primers DM5S10/DM5S11 (5′ probe) and DM5PR1/DM5PR2 (3′ probe), listed below. Two targeted ES <andsystem-candidate> clones containing the floxed allele Dmrt7neo were injected into C57Bl/6 blastocysts to generate chimeras. Chimeric males were bred with C57Bl/6 females to generate heterozygotes carrying Dmrt7neo. Dmrt7+/Dmrt7neo females were bred with male β-actin-Cre transgenic mice to delete the floxed sequences and generate heterozygous Dmrt7−/+ deletion mutants, which were interbred to generate homozygous Dmrt7−/− mutants.
17447844	Arrows indicate the location of XY body. SYCP3 antibody staining (green) shows normal synapsis of homologous chromosome synapse in Dmrt7 mutant <andsystem-candidate>. DMRT7 protein (red) is localized to the XY body in wild-type (top row) and is not detected in Dmrt7 mutant (bottom row).
17447844	(B) Southern blots of targeted and wild-type ES <andsystem-candidate> clones. Genomic DNAs from ES cell clones were digested with NsiI/NotI and EcoRI. The 5′ external probe hybridizes to 14.2-kb (wild-type) and 6-kb (targeted) NsiI/NotI fragments. The 3′ probe hybridizes to 14.6-kb (wild-type) and 4.7-kb (targeted) EcoRI fragments.
17447844	Testis sections from adult mice stained with antibody to androgen receptor (red) and counterstained with DAPI (blue). In both wild-type (top) and mutant (bottom) testis sections, androgen receptor protein is expressed in Sertoli <andsystem-candidate> and peritubular myoid cell. Mutant testis section shows abnormal localization of Sertoli cell nuclei, which are displaced from basement membrane.
17447844	We thank members of the Zarkower and Bardwell labs for many helpful discussions; Dan Camerini-Otero, John Logsdon, and Scott Hawley for insights into evolution of meiotic regulators; Hiromitsu Tanaka, Yoshitake Nishimune, and David Elliot for generously sharing antibodies; and Dies Meijer for sharing Dhh-Cre mice. We thank the University of Minnesota Mouse Genetics Laboratory for ES <andsystem-candidate> injection. Some images were obtained using the Middlebury Biology Imaging Facility, equipped in part through the National Science Foundation (Course, Curriculum, and Laboratory Improvement, 0088412). SHN is a research fellow of the Japan Society for Promotion of Science.
17244351	To further characterise the gene expression pattern during CIA, we performed hierarchical cluster analysis for these 310 genes. Six gene clusters were identified (clusters I to VI, Figure 2b), each with a distinct gene expression pattern during CIA. Cluster I contains 16 genes, representing genes that were upregulated after induction of CIA. The expression of these genes reached a peak at the onset phase of the disease and functional clustering results revealed that they are related to the immune response. Cluster II contains 12 genes whose expression was gradually upregulated and reached a peak at the chronic phase of CIA. These genes are mainly related to the immune response, organelle membrane and extracellular region and space. Cluster III contains 78 genes that were only upregulated at the PI phase. These genes are related to the intercellular junction. More than half of the genes (156 of 310) belong to cluster IV and represent genes specifically downregultaed at the chronic phase. These genes are functionally related to lymphocyte proliferation, T <andsystem-candidate> activation, protein binding as well as the notch signal pathway. Cluster V contains eight genes downregulated at the PI phase. Cluster VI contains 18 genes downregulated at the OA phase. The GO term classification showed no functional cluster that was significantly enriched in these two gene clusters.
17244351	Twenty-one genes were identified as potential candidate genes for six of the eight small-effect QTL according to their gene expression patterns during CIA and their genomic locations. No candidate genes were located in QTL 4 and 7, suggesting that QTG polymorphisms of the susceptibility genes inside these two QTL might not affect the phenotype by regulating gene expression. Two of the 21 candidate genes were reported to be involved in arthritis. Mapk14, a candidate gene for locus 8 and also called p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) alpha, regulates the production of arthritis-essential cytokines, such as tumour necrosis factor and interleukin-1 [32]. Moreover, inhibitors of p38 MAPK could attenuate CIA in rats [33], and p38 MAPK is becoming a potential therapeutic target in RA [32]. Stat5a, a candidate gene for loci 6, is an essential molecule for lymphoid development and differentiation [34]. Stat5a-deficient mice were reported to lose tolerance, resulting in the development of autoimmune diseases. Stat5a is suggested to contribute to tolerance through maintenance of the CD4+CD25+ regulatory T <andsystem-candidate> population [35].
17244351	Differentially expressed genes in the DBA/1 strain during collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). Three experimental conditions, post-immunisation (PI), onset of arthritis (OA) and chronic arthritis (CA), were compared with naïve control (NC) to search for differentially expressed genes. (a) Venn diagram indicating the number of overlapping genes differentially expressed at three phases of CIA. (b) Hierarchical clustering of the 310 differentially expressed genes. The left panel shows the distribution of relative gene expression across the hierarchical tree structure. Rows represent individual genes; columns represent individual value of triplicate samples for each experimental group. Each <andsystem-candidate> in the matrix represents the expression level of a gene, with red and green indicating transcription levels above and below the normal values for that gene, respectively. Four sample groups are indicated above the expression matrix. Six basic gene clusters (clusters I to VI) were yielded by the analysis according to the gene expression pattern during CIA. The expression patterns of the gene cluster are graphed and the major biological activities for each cluster that were examined by functional clustering analysis are indicated on the right.
17244351	aFold change calculated by comparing DBA/1 with FVB/N. bFold change calculated by comparing post-immunisation (PI), onset of arthritis (OA) and chronic arthritis (CA) with naive control (NC), respectively. <andsystem-candidate>, chromosome; CIA, collagen-induced arthritis.
16628246	ATRX is an <andsystem-candidate>-encoded member of the SNF2 family of ATPase/helicase proteins thought to regulate gene expression by modifying chromatin at target loci. Mutations in ATRX provided the first example of a human genetic disease associated with defects in such proteins. To better understand the role of ATRX in development and the associated abnormalities in the ATR-X (alpha thalassemia mental retardation, X-linked) syndrome, we conditionally inactivated the homolog in mice, Atrx, at the 8- to 16-cell stage of development. The protein, Atrx, was ubiquitously expressed, and male embryos null for Atrx implanted and gastrulated normally but did not survive beyond 9.5 days postcoitus due to a defect in formation of the extraembryonic trophoblast, one of the first terminally differentiated lineages in the developing embryo. Carrier female mice that inherit a maternal null allele should be affected, since the paternal X chromosome is normally inactivated in extraembryonic tissues. Surprisingly, however, some carrier females established a normal placenta and appeared to escape the usual pattern of imprinted X-inactivation in these tissues. Together these findings demonstrate an unexpected, specific, and essential role for Atrx in the development of the murine trophoblast and present an example of escape from imprinted X chromosome inactivation.
16628246	ATRX is an X-encoded member of the SNF2 family of ATPase/helicase proteins thought to regulate gene expression by modifying chromatin at target loci. Mutations in ATRX provided the first example of a human genetic disease associated with defects in such proteins. To better understand the role of ATRX in development and the associated abnormalities in the ATR-X (alpha thalassemia mental retardation, X-linked) syndrome, we conditionally inactivated the homolog in mice, Atrx, at the 8- to 16-<andsystem-candidate> stage of development. The protein, Atrx, was ubiquitously expressed, and male embryos null for Atrx implanted and gastrulated normally but did not survive beyond 9.5 days postcoitus due to a defect in formation of the extraembryonic trophoblast, one of the first terminally differentiated lineages in the developing embryo. Carrier female mice that inherit a maternal null allele should be affected, since the paternal X chromosome is normally inactivated in extraembryonic tissues. Surprisingly, however, some carrier females established a normal placenta and appeared to escape the usual pattern of imprinted X-inactivation in these tissues. Together these findings demonstrate an unexpected, specific, and essential role for Atrx in the development of the murine trophoblast and present an example of escape from imprinted X chromosome inactivation.
16628246	ATRX belongs to a class of proteins that may modify how DNA is packaged into chromatin, altering the accessibility of other proteins in the nucleus to DNA. In this way, ATRX is thought to influence gene expression. Mutations in the ATRX gene, which is located on the female sex chromosome (<andsystem-candidate>), provided the first example of a human disease (ATR-X syndrome) associated with defects in such proteins. Affected males (XMUTY) have multiple developmental abnormalities in a wide variety of systems. Currently, it is not understood how proteins like ATRX influence cell biology. To address this question, the authors deleted the version of the gene in mice, Atrx. Although affected male mice (XMUTY) started to develop normally, they died early in development because they failed to form a normal placenta. In the placenta, female mice normally inactivate the X chromosome that they inherit from their fathers (Xp), so if females inherit from their mother an X chromosome (Xm) that bears the abnormal copy of Atrx (XmMUTXp), one would predict that, like affected males, they would fail to form a normal placenta. The authors unexpectedly found this not to be so. They showed, instead, that in such females the normal, paternally derived Atrx gene is active. This study has therefore demonstrated an important facet of X-chromosome imprinting.
16628246	ATRX belongs to a class of proteins that may modify how DNA is packaged into chromatin, altering the accessibility of other proteins in the nucleus to DNA. In this way, ATRX is thought to influence gene expression. Mutations in the ATRX gene, which is located on the female sex chromosome (X), provided the first example of a human disease (ATR-X syndrome) associated with defects in such proteins. Affected males (XMUTY) have multiple developmental abnormalities in a wide variety of systems. Currently, it is not understood how proteins like ATRX influence <andsystem-candidate> biology. To address this question, the authors deleted the version of the gene in mice, Atrx. Although affected male mice (XMUTY) started to develop normally, they died early in development because they failed to form a normal placenta. In the placenta, female mice normally inactivate the X chromosome that they inherit from their fathers (Xp), so if females inherit from their mother an X chromosome (Xm) that bears the abnormal copy of Atrx (XmMUTXp), one would predict that, like affected males, they would fail to form a normal placenta. The authors unexpectedly found this not to be so. They showed, instead, that in such females the normal, paternally derived Atrx gene is active. This study has therefore demonstrated an important facet of X-chromosome imprinting.
16628246	ATR-<andsystem-candidate> syndrome is a severe, nonprogressive form of X-linked mental retardation that is frequently associated with multiple congenital abnormalities [1]. It is usually associated with a mild form of α-thalassaemia, caused by reduced expression of structurally intact α-globin genes, and characterised by the presence of β-globin tetramers (haemoglobin H inclusion bodies) in peripheral red blood cells. Carrier females occasionally manifest haemoglobin H inclusions, but are otherwise intellectually and physically normal. Studies of X-chromosome inactivation in carrier females have demonstrated preferential inactivation of the chromosome bearing the abnormal allele in a variety of tissues [2], and this skewing of X-inactivation is thought to explain the mild phenotype observed in carriers.
16628246	The ATR-<andsystem-candidate> syndrome is caused by mutations in a gene (ATRX) that comprises 36 exons spanning 300 kb of genomic DNA at Chromosome Xq13.3 [3]. This gene encodes two dominant protein isoforms (Figure 1). As well as the full-length ATRX protein of ~280 kDa, which is encoded by a transcript of ~10 kb, we recently demonstrated that a truncated isoform called ATRXt (~200 kDa) is produced from a transcript of around 7 kb, which arises when intron 11 fails to be spliced from the primary transcript and an alternative intronic poly(A) signal is used [4]. The mouse homolog of the ATRX gene, Atrx, is also situated on the X chromosome, and also gives rise to full-length (Atrx, ~280 kDa) and truncated (Atrxt, ~200 kDa) isoforms [4,5].
16628246	The consistent core of clinical and haematological features observed in ATR-<andsystem-candidate> patients suggests that, like the SWI2/SNF2 chromatin-remodelling protein, ATRX probably regulates transcription of a discrete set of target genes. However, although there are clearly others to be found, at present the α-globin genes remain the only confirmed targets for transcriptional regulation by ATRX. Little is currently known about the precise role of the ATRX protein during mammalian development. To investigate the role of this protein during mouse development, we generated a conditionally deleted allele of the Atrx gene in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells, and used these cells to examine the effect of ablating expression of the full-length Atrx protein in ES cells and in mouse embryos.
16628246	Like the human gene, the mouse Atrx gene is also <andsystem-candidate>-linked, such that a direct disruption of the single Atrx allele in male ES cells would immediately give rise to the null state. No targeted clones were recovered after attempted homologous recombination in male E14TG2a ES cells using two different vectors that removed exon 18 of the Atrx gene. Exon 18 encodes the first of the seven motifs composing the conserved SNF2-like domain of Atrx (Figure 1); mutation of the corresponding motif of the yeast SNF2 protein has been shown to severely impair SWI/SNF-dependent gene expression [12]. The failure to recover targeted clones with these vectors suggested that Atrx may be important for normal ES cell growth and expansion and that direct targeting of the single locus may not be possible. We therefore adopted a conditional strategy for targeting exon 18 (Figure 2) and recovered two clones in which exon 18 has been flanked by loxP recognition sites for the Cre recombinase (Atrxflox allele in Figure 2A) (Figure 2B). This allele also contains a loxP-flanked MC1-neor cassette in intron 17 (Figure 2A). Northern and Western blot analyses (Figure 2D and 2E) confirmed that the Atrxflox clones continued to express both full-length Atrx protein and the truncated Atrxt isoform.
16628246	Like the human gene, the mouse Atrx gene is also X-linked, such that a direct disruption of the single Atrx allele in male ES cells would immediately give rise to the null state. No targeted clones were recovered after attempted homologous recombination in male E14TG2a ES cells using two different vectors that removed exon 18 of the Atrx gene. Exon 18 encodes the first of the seven motifs composing the conserved SNF2-like domain of Atrx (Figure 1); mutation of the corresponding motif of the yeast SNF2 protein has been shown to severely impair SWI/SNF-dependent gene expression [12]. The failure to recover targeted clones with these vectors suggested that Atrx may be important for normal ES <andsystem-candidate> growth and expansion and that direct targeting of the single locus may not be possible. We therefore adopted a conditional strategy for targeting exon 18 (Figure 2) and recovered two clones in which exon 18 has been flanked by loxP recognition sites for the Cre recombinase (Atrxflox allele in Figure 2A) (Figure 2B). This allele also contains a loxP-flanked MC1-neor cassette in intron 17 (Figure 2A). Northern and Western blot analyses (Figure 2D and 2E) confirmed that the Atrxflox clones continued to express both full-length Atrx protein and the truncated Atrxt isoform.
16628246	Atrxnull ES cells could be maintained in culture but were generally slower growing than Atrx+ ES clones, and appeared to undergo higher rates of spontaneous differentiation. We investigated directly the effect of Atrx on ES <andsystem-candidate> growth by comparing Atrx+ and Atrxnull ES cell clones in competition cultures. Equal numbers of Atrx+ (bearing either an AtrxWT or an Atrxflox allele) and Atrxnull (bearing an AtrxΔ18Δneo allele) ES cells were inoculated into cultures and the mixed cultures were passaged (1:3 split) every 2 d for 8–10 d. The relative abundance of the different alleles in the culture at each time point was analysed by Southern blotting (Figure 3A). The clone containing the AtrxΔ18Δneo allele was rapidly outgrown by both AtrxWT ES cells and cells bearing the Atrxflox allele. In a control competition experiment between different clones bearing functional Atrx alleles (AtrxWT and Atrxflox), both clones continued to be equally represented after 8 d of cocultivation. Thus, although Atrxnull ES cells could be recovered and maintained in culture by a conditional targeting approach, these cocultivation experiments suggested that the absence of Atrx does negatively impact upon normal ES cell growth.
16628246	To investigate a possible <andsystem-candidate>-cycle defect in the absence of Atrx, we analysed the cell cycle distribution of bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)-pulsed ES cells by flow cytometry (Figure S1A). Surprisingly, both Atrxnull ES cell clones exhibited a cell cycle profile that was indistinguishable from ES cells bearing a functional Atrx allele (AtrxWT or Atrxflox). We also specifically quantitated the mitotic index within each population by flow cytometry after staining ES cells for phosphorylated (Ser10) histone H3, a specific marker of mitosis (Figure S1B) [13]. Consistent with the normal cell-cycle profile observed above, there was no depletion in the size of the mitotic population in the Atrxnull ES clones, despite their slow growth. Finally, we investigated whether the growth defect in the Atrxnull ES cells was due to an up-regulation of apoptosis by staining cells with Annexin V (Figure S2) and found that the proportion of apoptotic cells was not significantly affected by the absence of full-length Atrx. Thus, the growth defect observed in ES cells lacking Atrx is not due to a specific cell cycle block or significant induction of cell death. While the cause of the proliferative delay is not yet clear, since Atrxnull ES cells appear to undergo higher rates of spontaneous differentiation (unpublished data), it seems likely that the observed growth defect reflects the spontaneous transition from fast-cycling, undifferentiated ES cells into more slowly cycling, differentiated cell types in these cultures.
16628246	It has been shown that disease-causing mutations in the human ATRX gene give rise to changes in the normal pattern of DNA methylation at several repetitive sequences within the human genome [11]. Notably, the transcribed region of the ribosomal DNA (rDNA) repeat was found to be significantly hypomethylated in ATR-<andsystem-candidate> patients relative to normal individuals. Using methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes, we also observed significant hypomethylation at several sites tested within the mouse rDNA repeats in Atrxnull ES cells and 12-d embryoid bodies relative to ES cells and embryoid bodies bearing a functional Atrx allele (AtrxWT or Atrxflox) (Figure 3B and 3C). The observation that rDNA is hypomethylated in the absence of Atrx, even in ES cells, is consistent with the finding that hypomethylation of the human rDNA repeats is detectable from an early developmental stage in ATR-X patients. Other mouse repetitive sequence elements surveyed in ES cell DNA include the heterochromatic major satellite (assayed with MaeII) and minor satellite (assayed with HpaII) repeats, as well as interspersed retroviral repeats of the intracisternal A particle (IAP) type and the Line 1 and Sine B1 families (all assayed with HpaII). These repeats were found to be moderately (Line 1 and Sine B1) or highly (IAP, major satellite, minor satellite) methylated in wild-type ES cells, and this methylation was not detectably perturbed by the absence of Atrx (Figure S3 and unpublished data). Taken together, these data indicate that the subtle interplay between the ATRX protein and DNA methylation observed in human patients is also present in mouse cells.
16628246	It has been shown that disease-causing mutations in the human ATRX gene give rise to changes in the normal pattern of DNA methylation at several repetitive sequences within the human genome [11]. Notably, the transcribed region of the ribosomal DNA (rDNA) repeat was found to be significantly hypomethylated in ATR-X patients relative to normal individuals. Using methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes, we also observed significant hypomethylation at several sites tested within the mouse rDNA repeats in Atrxnull ES cells and 12-d embryoid bodies relative to ES cells and embryoid bodies bearing a functional Atrx allele (AtrxWT or Atrxflox) (Figure 3B and 3C). The observation that rDNA is hypomethylated in the absence of Atrx, even in ES cells, is consistent with the finding that hypomethylation of the human rDNA repeats is detectable from an early developmental stage in ATR-X patients. Other mouse repetitive sequence elements surveyed in ES <andsystem-candidate> DNA include the heterochromatic major satellite (assayed with MaeII) and minor satellite (assayed with HpaII) repeats, as well as interspersed retroviral repeats of the intracisternal A particle (IAP) type and the Line 1 and Sine B1 families (all assayed with HpaII). These repeats were found to be moderately (Line 1 and Sine B1) or highly (IAP, major satellite, minor satellite) methylated in wild-type ES cells, and this methylation was not detectably perturbed by the absence of Atrx (Figure S3 and unpublished data). Taken together, these data indicate that the subtle interplay between the ATRX protein and DNA methylation observed in human patients is also present in mouse cells.
16628246	To investigate the role of the Atrx protein during mouse development, we initially established lines of mice bearing the Atrxflox allele. Two independently targeted Atrxflox ES <andsystem-candidate> clones with normal male karyotype were injected into C57BL/6 blastocysts to produce chimaeric mice, which were then used to obtain germline transmission. Intercrosses between males hemizygous (Atrxflox/Y) and females heterozygous (AtrxWT/flox) for the floxed allele were also carried out to generate homozygous females (Atrxflox/flox). Males hemizygous and females heterozygous or homozygous for the Atrxflox allele were viable, appeared healthy, and bred normally, suggesting that, as expected, the Atrxflox allele was functionally normal. To generate Atrxnull mice by Cre-mediated recombination, the Atrxflox mice were crossed with mice harboring a transgene in which the Cre recombinase is expressed under the control of the regulatory elements of the mouse GATA-1 gene (GATA1-cre) [14]. Widespread expression of the GATA1-cre transgene has been demonstrated during early embryogenesis [14]. We more accurately defined the onset of GATA1-cre expression using a ROSA26 reporter strain, in which a β-galactosidase/neor fusion reporter gene is expressed only after Cre-mediated excision of loxP-flanked transcription and translation termination signals [14]. We found that the GATA1-cre transgene was already active at the 16-cell morula stage of development (0.5 days postcoitus [dpc]) (Figure 4A).
16628246	To generate Atrxnull mice, heterozygous floxed females (AtrxWT/flox) were mated with homozygous GATA1-cre transgenic males (AtrxWT/Y;GATA1-cre+/+). No Atrxnull males (Atrxnull/Y;GATA1-cre+/−) were recovered at birth, indicating that the absence of Atrx results in embryonic lethality. This finding was unexpected, since human ATR-<andsystem-candidate> patients clearly survive to adulthood (see Discussion). Embryos were dissected at 7.5, 8.5, and 9.5 dpc and genotyped by PCR analysis of DNA extracted from yolk sac or total embryo (Figure 4B and Protocol S1). Atrxnull males were present at expected mendelian ratios (~25%) at both 7.5 dpc and 8.5 dpc (Table 1). However, by 9.5 dpc, depletion was observed both in the number of Atrxnull males (7%) and in the total number of males recovered (31%). No Atrxnull males were recovered after 9.5 dpc. Thus the absence of Atrx gives rise to embryonic lethality in mice before 9.5 dpc.
16628246	To investigate whether the reduced size of the Atrxnull embryos was due to an increase in apoptosis, we analysed sections of paraffin-embedded 7.5 dpc embryos by TdT-mediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay (Figure 6A). Very few apoptotic cells were detected in wild-type 7.5 dpc embryos. In Atrxnull embryos, a slight increase in the apoptotic population was evident. However, consistent with our observation of a grossly normal apoptotic index in Atrxnull ES cells (Figure S2), the apoptotic response observed in Atrxnull embryos was also not uniform, but was restricted to a low number of scattered TUNEL-positive cells. Since this small apoptotic response is unlikely to account fully for the dramatic size deficit observed in Atrxnull embryos, a possible proliferation defect was also investigated by immunohistochemical staining of 7.5 dpc embryo sections for the mitosis marker phosphorylated (Ser10) histone H3 [13]. Relative to the very high mitotic index observed in wild-type embryos, the proportion of mitotic cells observed in Atrxnull embryos at 7.5 dpc was dramatically reduced (Figure 6B). Taken together, these results suggest that the size deficit observed in Atrxnull embryos prior to lethality largely reflects a proliferative defect, with a minor but indirect contribution from increased apoptosis. Although a growth defect was also observed in Atrxnull ES cells (Figure 3A), in contrast to the Atrxnull embryos, the mitotic index of the ES <andsystem-candidate> population (as measured with the same antibody) was not depleted (Figure S1B). These observations suggest that the mitotic defect observed in embryos is unlikely to be a direct, cell-autonomous effect of the absence of Atrx, and is more likely to be a secondary effect resulting from the failure to develop a normal trophoblast (see below).
16628246	To investigate whether the trophoblast defect was restricted to the production of secondary TGCs (produced by diploid precursors in the ectoplacental cone and derived originally from the polar trophectoderm overlying the inner <andsystem-candidate> mass of the blastocyst) or also affected the production of primary TGCs (resulting from differentiation of the mural trophectoderm of the blastocyst), blastocysts (3.5 dpc) from crosses between AtrxWT/flox females and GATA1-Cre homozygous transgenic males (AtrxWT/Y;GATA1-Cre+/+) were cultured in vitro for 5 d to monitor outgrowth of the primary trophoblast. After 5 d, individual blastocyst cultures were scored for the extent of primary trophoblast outgrowth, and the Atrx genotype and sex of the blastocyst were determined by PCR. Most blastocysts hatched from the zona pellucida within 24 h, and trophoblast cells spreading out from the inner cell mass could usually be detected within 48 h of culture. No difference was observed in the rate or extent of trophoblast outgrowth over 5 d of culture between Atrxnull blastocysts (Atrxnull/Y, n = 6) and blastocysts bearing an AtrxWT allele (AtrxWT/WT, n = 6; AtrxWT/null, n = 6; AtrxWT/Y, n = 6) (examples shown in Figure 7D), suggesting that the defect specifically involves the secondary giant cell compartment. This is consistent with the observation that Atrxnull conceptuses implant successfully and survive to gastrulation. Taken together, these data suggest that loss of Atrx results in a defect in formation of the secondary trophoblast that is apparent from 7.5 dpc. Despite initiating normal organisation in the embryo proper, Atrxnull conceptuses exhibit a proliferative defect by 7.5 dpc and die by around 9.5 dpc, probably due to a nutritional deficit resulting from failure to develop a normal trophoblast.
16628246	Female mice carrying an Atrxnull allele (AtrxWT/null;GATA1-cre+/−) were detected at 9.5 dpc (Table 1) and recovered at birth (unpublished data), although at both time points the number of carrier females was lower than that of wild-type (AtrxWT/WT;GATA1-cre+/−) females, suggesting that a proportion of carrier female embryos died in utero. Surviving adult carrier female mice were not phenotypically normal and exhibited mild behavioural abnormalities, although some could reproduce. For all AtrxWT/null carrier female embryos presented in Table 1, the AtrxWT allele was paternally derived, while the Atrxnull allele was maternally derived. In the mouse, X chromosome inactivation is subject to parental imprinting in the trophectoderm and primitive endoderm lineages that give rise to the extraembryonic tissues, resulting in inactivation of the paternal X chromosome (Xp) [18]. In contrast, in tissues of the embryo proper (derived from the inner <andsystem-candidate> mass of the blastocyst) X-inactivation is random [19]. Thus, in the extraembryonic compartment of AtrxWT/null carrier females, normal imprinted X-inactivation would be expected to result in silencing of the paternally derived AtrxWT allele, leaving only the Atrxnull allele on the active maternal X (Xm) and thereby render the extraembryonic tissues null for full-length Atrx protein. However, the absence of Atrx in the extraembryonic compartment is lethal in Atrxnull/Y males. This suggested the possibility of an escape from imprinted inactivation of the paternally derived AtrxWT allele in the extraembryonic compartment of a proportion of carrier female embryos.
16628246	Female mice carrying an Atrxnull allele (AtrxWT/null;GATA1-cre+/−) were detected at 9.5 dpc (Table 1) and recovered at birth (unpublished data), although at both time points the number of carrier females was lower than that of wild-type (AtrxWT/WT;GATA1-cre+/−) females, suggesting that a proportion of carrier female embryos died in utero. Surviving adult carrier female mice were not phenotypically normal and exhibited mild behavioural abnormalities, although some could reproduce. For all AtrxWT/null carrier female embryos presented in Table 1, the AtrxWT allele was paternally derived, while the Atrxnull allele was maternally derived. In the mouse, X chromosome inactivation is subject to parental imprinting in the trophectoderm and primitive endoderm lineages that give rise to the extraembryonic tissues, resulting in inactivation of the paternal X chromosome (Xp) [18]. In contrast, in tissues of the embryo proper (derived from the inner cell mass of the blastocyst) <andsystem-candidate>-inactivation is random [19]. Thus, in the extraembryonic compartment of AtrxWT/null carrier females, normal imprinted X-inactivation would be expected to result in silencing of the paternally derived AtrxWT allele, leaving only the Atrxnull allele on the active maternal X (Xm) and thereby render the extraembryonic tissues null for full-length Atrx protein. However, the absence of Atrx in the extraembryonic compartment is lethal in Atrxnull/Y males. This suggested the possibility of an escape from imprinted inactivation of the paternally derived AtrxWT allele in the extraembryonic compartment of a proportion of carrier female embryos.
16628246	To investigate further, we crossed homozygous Atrxflox/flox females and homozygous GATA1-cre transgenic males (AtrxWT/Y;GATA1-cre+/+), which would be expected to yield only Atrxnull males (Atrxnull/Y;GATA1-cre+/−) and carrier females (AtrxWT/null;GATA1-cre+/−). In these carrier females, the AtrxWT allele is paternally inherited. Embryos were dissected in their deciduas at 7.5 dpc, and paraffin sections were stained with anti-ATRX antibody, along with sections from a wild-type 7.5 dpc embryo for comparison (Figure 8). As described above, Atrx expression was detected in every <andsystem-candidate> in the epiblast (embryo proper) region of wild-type 7.5 dpc embryos (Figure 8B). In contrast, the epiblast region of carrier female embryos was composed of a mosaic of small clusters of Atrx-positive cells (in which the Atrxnull allele on Xm had been inactivated) and Atrx-negative cells (in which the AtrxWT allele on Xp had been inactivated), indicating that the Atrx gene was subject to normal random X-inactivation in the epiblast. Remarkably, clear Atrx expression could also be detected in the extraembryonic tissues of carrier females, as shown in the extraembryonic-derived chorionic ectoderm (Figure 8C). Atrx expression could be detected in almost all cells of the chorionic ectoderm. Atrx expression was also clearly detected in other extraembryonic structures, including TGCs (unpublished data). Escape from silencing of an Xp-inherited AtrxWT allele was also observed in the chorionic ectoderm of carrier females at 8.5 dpc (Figure S4). Thus, although random X-inactivation occurs normally within the epiblast, the AtrxWT allele (inherited on the Xp chromosome) escaped the normal imprinted X-inactivation in the extraembryonic compartment of some carrier females.
16628246	To investigate further, we crossed homozygous Atrxflox/flox females and homozygous GATA1-cre transgenic males (AtrxWT/Y;GATA1-cre+/+), which would be expected to yield only Atrxnull males (Atrxnull/Y;GATA1-cre+/−) and carrier females (AtrxWT/null;GATA1-cre+/−). In these carrier females, the AtrxWT allele is paternally inherited. Embryos were dissected in their deciduas at 7.5 dpc, and paraffin sections were stained with anti-ATRX antibody, along with sections from a wild-type 7.5 dpc embryo for comparison (Figure 8). As described above, Atrx expression was detected in every cell in the epiblast (embryo proper) region of wild-type 7.5 dpc embryos (Figure 8B). In contrast, the epiblast region of carrier female embryos was composed of a mosaic of small clusters of Atrx-positive cells (in which the Atrxnull allele on Xm had been inactivated) and Atrx-negative cells (in which the AtrxWT allele on Xp had been inactivated), indicating that the Atrx gene was subject to normal random <andsystem-candidate>-inactivation in the epiblast. Remarkably, clear Atrx expression could also be detected in the extraembryonic tissues of carrier females, as shown in the extraembryonic-derived chorionic ectoderm (Figure 8C). Atrx expression could be detected in almost all cells of the chorionic ectoderm. Atrx expression was also clearly detected in other extraembryonic structures, including TGCs (unpublished data). Escape from silencing of an Xp-inherited AtrxWT allele was also observed in the chorionic ectoderm of carrier females at 8.5 dpc (Figure S4). Thus, although random X-inactivation occurs normally within the epiblast, the AtrxWT allele (inherited on the Xp chromosome) escaped the normal imprinted X-inactivation in the extraembryonic compartment of some carrier females.
16628246	Atrxnull ES cells could not be recovered by direct targeting and were eventually generated by adopting a conditional targeting approach. This is consistent with our observation that Atrx is highly expressed in ES cells, and that the absence of full-length Atrx imparts a growth disadvantage relative to cells bearing a functional Atrx allele. At present, the cause of the proliferative delay in Atrxnull ES cells is not known. Interestingly, we demonstrated that apoptosis is not significantly up-regulated in ES cells lacking Atrx and is only mildly elevated in Atrxnull 7.5 dpc mouse embryos. In contrast, it was recently shown that the loss of Atrx markedly increased the apoptotic population in the differentiating cells of the embryonic cortex and postnatal hippocampus, when Atrx expression was ablated in the developing mouse forebrain using the Atrxflox allele described here [20]. The human ATRX protein has been shown to associate in a complex with Daxx [8], a protein that has been implicated in multiple pathways for the regulation of apoptosis [21]. It is possible that disruption of the mouse Atrx-Daxx complex (by ablation of the Atrx protein) could have triggered a universal proapoptotic response. However, our observations in ES cells demonstrate that the induction of apoptosis is not an automatic response triggered by the removal of Atrx in all <andsystem-candidate> types, and suggest that the inappropriate apoptosis observed in the Atrx-mutant forebrain may reflect a requirement for Atrx during terminal differentiation.
16628246	We show that Atrxnull male mice are not viable and embryos die by around 9.5 dpc. Before death, Atrxnull embryos exhibit a markedly reduced mitotic index, suggesting a proliferative defect. Although the embryonic compartment of the conceptus appears initially normal, by 7.5 dpc Atrxnull embryos display abnormalities in development of the trophoblast, including a depletion in the population of TGCs surrounding the conceptus and a reduction in the size of the ectoplacental cone, which contains the diploid giant <andsystem-candidate> precursors [22]. TGCs are highly differentiated, postmitotic cells that ultimately form an epithelial layer at the periphery of the placenta, which interfaces with the maternal cells of the decidua [23]. These highly invasive cells are important for mediating initial invasion of the uterine tissue, but are also involved in remodelling the maternal decidua after implantation and in secreting hormones that regulate fetal and maternal growth [24]. Since Atrxnull embryos appear to implant normally, lethality is likely to arise due to a failure of TGC function later during development.
16628246	Embryonic lethality in mice in the absence of Atrx was a surprising finding, as there had been no suggestion of foetal loss in the human ATR-<andsystem-candidate> syndrome. It is possible that the role of Atrx in the trophoblast is specific to mice and that ATRX has no role or is redundant in the human trophoblast. Indeed, the birth weight of babies with ATR-X syndrome is usually normal. An alternative explanation for the unexpectedly severe phenotype we observed in mice is that the AtrxΔ18Δneo deletion generated by Cre recombination completely ablates full-length Atrx protein (Figure 2E). In contrast, all disease-causing mutations characterised in human ATR-X pedigrees appear to give rise to hypomorphic alleles. Some full-length ATRX protein is detected in cases predicted to have truncating mutations (RJG, unpublished data), and residual ATPase activity in ATRX immunoprecipitates can be detected in Epstein-Barr virus-transformed lymphocytes of all human patients analysed to date (A. Argentaro and M. Mitson, unpublished data). The failure to observe a truly null ATRX allele among human patients strongly suggests that, as in the mouse, the complete absence of ATRX protein is incompatible with human fetal survival.
16628246	While this study has revealed an unexpected role for Atrx in the murine trophectoderm, as a result of the early lethality observed in Atrxnull embryos it is not possible to rule out other roles for Atrx at later developmental stages in tissues of the embryo proper. Indeed, we show that Atrx is highly expressed throughout the entire developing embryo at 7.5 dpc (Figure 5B), and it is likely that Atrx function will turn out to be important for other differentiating tissues. Tetraploid aggregation experiments (in which mutant embryos are rescued with wild-type extraembryonic tissues) might shed more light on the role of Atrx during later mouse development, but these issues can be more subtly dissected by combining the conditional Atrxflox allele that we have generated with different tissue-specific Cre transgenes. As mentioned above, this approach has already revealed a critical role for Atrx during neuronal differentiation in adult mice [20]. Further evidence that Atrx is also required at later stages of mouse development is provided by the observed dramatic skewing against Atrx-negative cells in some somatic tissues of carrier female mice, whose tissues initially comprise a mosaic of Atrx-positive and Atrx-negative cells as a result of random <andsystem-candidate>-inactivation (M. Muers, personal communication).
16628246	Atrx joins an expanding list of mouse genes for which targeted disruption results in peri-implantation lethality as a result of trophoblast or placental abnormalities (reviewed in [25]). Comparison with other phenotypes might provide some insight into the role of Atrx in trophoblast development. Atrx-mutant embryos progress further than embryos nullizygous for factors involved in the initial specification of trophoblast stem cells (such as Cdx2) or in stem <andsystem-candidate> maintenance and proliferation (such as Eomes). Cdx2-mutant embryos fail to implant and die between 3.5 and 5.5 dpc [26], while Eomes-mutant blastocysts implant into the uterus, but arrest soon after implantation without forming organised embryonic or extraembryonic structures [27]. In contrast, Atrx-mutant embryos implant successfully and establish organised embryonic structures by 7.5 dpc. The Atrx-mutant phenotype closely resembles that observed in mice nullizygous for the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hand1. Hand1-mutant conceptuses arrest at around 7.5 dpc and display a normal embryonic compartment, but, like Atrx-mutant embryos, ablation of Hand1 causes a reduction in the size of the ectoplacental cone and density of TGCs [28]. As with Atrx mutants, only arrested or resorbed Hand1-mutant conceptuses were recovered after 8.5 dpc. Also like Atrx, disruption of Hand1 specifically affects secondary giant cell formation, and primary trophoblast outgrowths from blastocysts appeared normal. Hand1 is required for terminal differentiation of secondary TGCs, and in its absence trophoblast cells arrest at a precursor stage in the ectoplacental cone [17,28]. Given the similarity of the Atrx- and Hand1-mutant phenotypes and the likelihood that Atrx acts as a transcriptional regulator by modifying chromatin structure, it will be of interest to determine whether Atrx is itself a regulator of Hand1 expression, or alternatively whether it acts as a co-regulator of one or more of the downstream transcriptional targets of Hand1. It is noteworthy that, in the brain-specific Atrx knockout mice, the defect was observed in terminally differentiating neurons [20]. The secondary TGCs affected in the universal Atrx knockout reported here represent one of the first terminally differentiated tissues in the developing mouse, and this may point to the requirement for Atrx in the high-level expression of some tissue-specific genes during the final stages of differentiation. Interestingly, the α-globin genes, the only confirmed transcriptional targets of regulation by human ATRX, are also highly expressed specifically during terminal differentiation within the erythroid lineage.
16628246	Another surprising finding of this study is that, in carrier female embryos, a paternally inherited AtrxWT allele appears to escape the process of imprinted <andsystem-candidate>-inactivation, which ordinarily silences the Xp chromosome in the extraembryonic compartment of female murine tissues [18]. Silencing of the AtrxWT allele on Xp should render these females null for Atrx in the extraembryonic tissues, since the normally active Xm chromosome carries the AtrxΔ18Δneo allele. Although not phenotypically normal, some Atrx carrier females developed to term and went on to reproduce. Thus, the failure to correctly silence the paternally derived AtrxWT allele in the extraembryonic tissues of carrier females is consistent with our observations that in Atrxnull males, the Atrx protein plays an essential role in the development of the trophoblast and is necessary for survival in utero in the mouse.
16628246	The survival of Atrx carrier females contrasts with the phenotypes seen in carriers of mutations of other murine <andsystem-candidate>-linked genes known to be essential in the extraembryonic compartment. For example, targeted disruption of the dyskerin (Dkc1), glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), and choroideremia (Chm) genes cause embryonic lethality in null male embryos through defects of the extraembryonic-derived tissues [29–31]. Female mice carrying mutations of these genes on the maternally inherited X chromosome also die in utero, whereas females that inherit the mutation on the Xp chromosome survive. Thus, unlike Atrx, these genes and/or their effects on cell growth are unable to circumvent the processes that ultimately cause all cells in the extraembryonic tissues to express only the maternally derived X chromosome. How might expression of the paternal AtrxWT allele be maintained in the extraembryonic tissues of the Atrx carrier females?
16628246	The survival of Atrx carrier females contrasts with the phenotypes seen in carriers of mutations of other murine X-linked genes known to be essential in the extraembryonic compartment. For example, targeted disruption of the dyskerin (Dkc1), glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), and choroideremia (Chm) genes cause embryonic lethality in null male embryos through defects of the extraembryonic-derived tissues [29–31]. Female mice carrying mutations of these genes on the maternally inherited X chromosome also die in utero, whereas females that inherit the mutation on the Xp chromosome survive. Thus, unlike Atrx, these genes and/or their effects on <andsystem-candidate> growth are unable to circumvent the processes that ultimately cause all cells in the extraembryonic tissues to express only the maternally derived X chromosome. How might expression of the paternal AtrxWT allele be maintained in the extraembryonic tissues of the Atrx carrier females?
16628246	One possibility is that, like some other <andsystem-candidate>-linked genes, silencing of the Atrx gene on Xp is incomplete, such that there is always a low-level, leaky output of Atrx from a normally inactivated Xp chromosome in extraembryonic tissues. However, it was recently demonstrated that the paternal Atrx (called Xnp) allele is completely silenced in a normal mouse trophoblast stem cell line [32], suggesting that Atrx does not normally escape imprinted X-inactivation in the extraembryonic tissues of wild-type females. Thus, the expression of the Xp-linked AtrxWT allele that we observed is unique to female carriers of the Atrxnull allele.
16628246	One possibility is that, like some other X-linked genes, silencing of the Atrx gene on Xp is incomplete, such that there is always a low-level, leaky output of Atrx from a normally inactivated Xp chromosome in extraembryonic tissues. However, it was recently demonstrated that the paternal Atrx (called Xnp) allele is completely silenced in a normal mouse trophoblast stem <andsystem-candidate> line [32], suggesting that Atrx does not normally escape imprinted X-inactivation in the extraembryonic tissues of wild-type females. Thus, the expression of the Xp-linked AtrxWT allele that we observed is unique to female carriers of the Atrxnull allele.
16628246	Perhaps a more likely explanation for this phenomenon stems from experimental observations suggesting that imprinted <andsystem-candidate>-inactivation is not imposed on all precursors of the mouse extraembryonic tissues: A subpopulation of cells may escape this process and make a random “choice” of which X chromosome will be inactivated. On average, 50% of the cells in this randomly inactivating subpopulation would be expected to maintain an active Xp chromosome. In support of this hypothesis, it has been demonstrated that expression of paternally transmitted X-linked lacZ [33,34] and GFP [35] transgenes failed to be silenced in a small subpopulation of extraembryonic cells. Further, it has been shown that in a subpopulation of extraembryonic cells, it is the Xm rather than the Xp that undergoes late replication, a molecular correlate of the inactive state [18,36]. Although initially small and quickly diluted in normal embryos, the cellular subpopulation that inactivates the Xm chromosome could rapidly expand to replace the normally imprinted cells in extraembryonic lineages if the normal silencing of Xp compromises cell growth or differentiation. Interestingly, it has been suggested that the size of the population that initially escapes imprinting may range widely (from 0% to 30%), even between genetically identical embryos [37], and this may account for the variable phenotype observed among females bearing Xm-linked mutant alleles of genes essential for normal extraembryonic development [38]. Put simply, carrier females bearing a small initial population of escaping cells would be more severely affected than those bearing a larger population. This could explain why we have observed significant phenotypic variation among Atrx carrier females, with some carriers dying in utero by 9.5 dpc (Table 1) and others developing to term.
16628246	Perhaps a more likely explanation for this phenomenon stems from experimental observations suggesting that imprinted X-inactivation is not imposed on all precursors of the mouse extraembryonic tissues: A subpopulation of cells may escape this process and make a random “choice” of which X chromosome will be inactivated. On average, 50% of the cells in this randomly inactivating subpopulation would be expected to maintain an active Xp chromosome. In support of this hypothesis, it has been demonstrated that expression of paternally transmitted X-linked lacZ [33,34] and GFP [35] transgenes failed to be silenced in a small subpopulation of extraembryonic cells. Further, it has been shown that in a subpopulation of extraembryonic cells, it is the Xm rather than the Xp that undergoes late replication, a molecular correlate of the inactive state [18,36]. Although initially small and quickly diluted in normal embryos, the cellular subpopulation that inactivates the Xm chromosome could rapidly expand to replace the normally imprinted cells in extraembryonic lineages if the normal silencing of Xp compromises <andsystem-candidate> growth or differentiation. Interestingly, it has been suggested that the size of the population that initially escapes imprinting may range widely (from 0% to 30%), even between genetically identical embryos [37], and this may account for the variable phenotype observed among females bearing Xm-linked mutant alleles of genes essential for normal extraembryonic development [38]. Put simply, carrier females bearing a small initial population of escaping cells would be more severely affected than those bearing a larger population. This could explain why we have observed significant phenotypic variation among Atrx carrier females, with some carriers dying in utero by 9.5 dpc (Table 1) and others developing to term.
16628246	Another possible mechanism is that inactivation of the paternal <andsystem-candidate> proceeds normally in all cells, but subsequently the Atrx gene within individual cells is reactivated. Alternatively, in the absence of Atrx, the paternal allele may partially escape the normal process of silencing. In both of these cases, other genes on the paternal X chromosome must be inactivated and remain so, since blocking inactivation of the entire Xp chromosome causes embryonic lethality due to biallelic expression of X-linked genes in the trophoblast [39].
16628246	ATR-<andsystem-candidate> syndrome is the first human genetic disease known to be caused by mutations in a chromatin remodelling factor. At present we do not know how ATRX influences gene expression or what effect it has on cell behaviour. Nevertheless, we have previously noted that none of the natural mutations causing ATR-X syndrome are nulls, which suggests that it plays a critical role in normal development. Results of conditional inactivation of Atrx in the developing mouse forebrain, based on the Atrxflox allele described here, shows that Atrx exerts a major effect on terminally differentiating neurons. Conditional inactivation of Atrx in other tissues is underway. Here we have shown that animal-wide disruption of the Atrx gene causes a severe embryonic-lethal phenotype, revealing an essential role for Atrx in the formation of the murine trophoblast. In addition, Atrx appears to escape imprinted X-chromosome inactivation in the extraembryonic tissues of some carrier female mice.
16628246	ATR-X syndrome is the first human genetic disease known to be caused by mutations in a chromatin remodelling factor. At present we do not know how ATRX influences gene expression or what effect it has on <andsystem-candidate> behaviour. Nevertheless, we have previously noted that none of the natural mutations causing ATR-X syndrome are nulls, which suggests that it plays a critical role in normal development. Results of conditional inactivation of Atrx in the developing mouse forebrain, based on the Atrxflox allele described here, shows that Atrx exerts a major effect on terminally differentiating neurons. Conditional inactivation of Atrx in other tissues is underway. Here we have shown that animal-wide disruption of the Atrx gene causes a severe embryonic-lethal phenotype, revealing an essential role for Atrx in the formation of the murine trophoblast. In addition, Atrx appears to escape imprinted X-chromosome inactivation in the extraembryonic tissues of some carrier female mice.
16628246	ES <andsystem-candidate> clones bearing the Atrxflox allele (1 × 107 cells) were transiently transfected with 50 μg of uncut Cre expression plasmid (pCAGGS-Cre-IRESpuro) [40]. Following transfection, cells were plated at a range of clonal densities in complete medium without G418, and isolated subclones were picked after 7 d. Subclones were expanded and analysed for the presence of a recombinant locus initially by PCR, to detect deletion of the MC1neopA cassette, and then by Southern blot and hybridisation with the intron 17 probe described above (Figure 2A and 2C). Northern blots were carried out according to standard techniques using 20 μg of total RNA isolated using TRI Reagent (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, United States). The blot was hybridised with a probe from within exon 10 of the Atrx gene (generated with primers Mxnp4 and Mxnp28 [Table S1]). After it was stripped, the membrane was hybridised with a β-actin cDNA probe (Clontech, Palo Alto, California, United States). Protein extraction and detection of Atrx by Western blotting was performed as described previously [4], using the mouse monoclonal anti-ATRX antibody 23C [15]. Analyses of cell cycle and apoptosis are described in Protocol S1. Methylation of rDNA was analysed in DNA from ES cell clones or from embryoid bodies recovered after 7 d of in vitro differentiation as described previously [41]. Genomic DNA was digested with methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes as described and analysed by Southern blotting. The RIB3 and RIB4 probes (which were amplified from human DNA, but cross-react with the mouse rDNA repeat) have been described previously [11]. Oligonucleotide probes to detect Line 1 and Sine B1 repeats have been described previously [42]. The minor satellite probe was a 27-mer oligonucleotide (mCENT2). The major satellite probe was a 27-mer oligonucleotide (DG27). The IAP probe was an ~400 bp PCR product (primers 14A and 13K) amplified from an IAP inserted into the mouse agouti gene [43] and was a gift from Peter Warnecke and Tim Bestor. The PCR product included the entire 5′ LTR of the IAP. All oligonucleotide sequences are shown in Table S1.
16628246	Targeted Atrxflox ES <andsystem-candidate> clones were injected into C57BL/6 blastocysts and transferred into 2.5 dpc pseudopregnant recipients by standard techniques. Resulting chimeras were mated with C57BL/6 to establish germline transmission. Offspring with the Atrxflox allele were identified by Southern blotting of SacI-digested tail DNA using the intron 17 probe as shown in Figure 2A and 2C. For Cre-recombination, Atrxflox mice were crossed with GATA1-Cre transgenic mice as described in the text. Recombinant alleles were detected by Southern blotting as described above or by PCR as described in Protocol S1.
16628246	7.5 dpc decidual swellings were dissected away from maternal tissue and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde/PBS overnight at 4 °C. After embryos were washed thoroughly in PBS, they were dehydrated through an ethanol series and xylene, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned at 5 μm. Sections were processed for immunohistochemistry using the ABC Staining System (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, California, United States) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Sections were stained with rabbit polyclonal antibodies against ATRX (H-300, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), Placental lactogen-I (AB1288, Chemicon International, Temecula, California, United States) and phospho (Ser10)-histone H3 (06–570, Upstate Biotechnology, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States). Where appropriate, adjacent sections were stained with haematoxylin. In some cases, adjacent sections were also analysed to detect apoptotic cells by TUNEL using the in situ <andsystem-candidate> death detection kit (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). After labelling, these slides were mounted in Vectashield containing DAPI (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, California, United States) and visualised by fluorescence microscopy. Whole-mount in situ hybridisations were performed on 8.5 dpc embryos (dissected away from maternal and extraembryonic tissues) using a brachyury (T) riboprobe [16] and on bisected decidual implantation sites from which embryos (8.5 dpc) had been removed using a placental lactogen-1 (Pl-1) riboprobe (see Protocol S1 for details).
16628246	(A) Representative FACS profiles of BrdU-pulsed ES cells bearing either functional (AtrxWT or Atrxflox) or null (AtrxΔ18Δneo) Atrx alleles showing BrdU-FITC (y-axis, logarithmic scale) against propidium iodide (x-axis, linear scale). The gated populations show cells in G1 (PIlow, BrdU-negative) (R1), S (BrdU-positive) (R2), and G2/M (PIhi, BrdU-negative) (R3) phases of the <andsystem-candidate> cycle. Below is shown the quantitation of gated populations, indicating the percentage of cells in G1, S, and G2/M cell-cycle phases in each culture.
16628246	(B) FACS profiles of ES cells bearing either functional (AtrxWT or Atrxflox) or null (AtrxΔ18Δneo) Atrx alleles stained for the mitosis marker phosphorylated (Ser10) histone H3 (FITC, y-axis, logarithmic scale) against propidium iodide (x-axis, linear scale). The size of the mitotic population (phosphoH3S10-positive, PIhi)(gate R3) is indicated for each profile. The ES <andsystem-candidate> clone analysed in each trace is indicated.
16628246	DNA from Atrx-positive (bearing either an AtrxWT or Atrxflox allele) or Atrxnull (bearing the AtrxΔ18Δneo allele) ES cells was digested with either a CpG-methylation-sensitive enzyme HpaII (H) or its methylation-insensitive isoschizomer MspI (M) as indicated, and digested DNA was analysed by Southern blotting. Membranes were hybridised with probes specific for the mouse Line 1 (A), Sine B1 (B), minor satellite (C), and IAP (D) repeat elements. No significant loss of CpG-methylation was observed at any of these repetitive elements in Atrxnull ES cells. As a positive control for loss of methylation, DNA from ES cells lacking either the Dnmt1 (Dnmt1−/−) or both the Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b (Dnmt3a3b−/−) DNA methyltransferases was included in the analysis of Line 1 and Sine B1 repeats. Loss of CpG-methylation was clearly observed at these repetitive elements in these <andsystem-candidate> lines.
16628246	(A) High-magnification image (400×) of the neural fold region (nf) (embryo proper) of a carrier female (AtrxWT/null) embryo. This tissue is clearly comprised of a mosaic of Atrx-positive and Atrx-negative cells due to random <andsystem-candidate>-inactivation. This section was counterstained with haematoxylin.
16628246	(B) High-magnification image (400×) of the same embryo depicted in (A), showing the extraembryonic derived-chorionic ectoderm (ce) and visceral endoderm (ve), two tissues that undergo imprinted <andsystem-candidate>-inactivation. Although Atrx is poorly expressed in the visceral endoderm (even in wild-type females [unpublished data]), strong expression of Atrx can be seen in the chorionic ectoderm, indicating that the paternally-derived AtrxWT allele had escaped inactivation in this tissue.
16628246	The Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=OMIM) accession number for ATR-<andsystem-candidate> syndrome is 301040. The GeneID (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene) for human ATRX is 546 and for mouse Atrx is 22589. The GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) accession number for the minor satellite probe mCENT2 is X14470 (nucleotides 75–101), for the major satellite probe DG27 is M25032 (nucleotides 146–172), and for the IAP probe is L33247.
16628246	(B) Southern blot analysis of EcoRI-digested DNA from either wild-type ES cells (E14) or targeted ES <andsystem-candidate> clones bearing the Atrxflox allele (1/F12 and 1/G11) hybridised with either the 20/27 (left blot) or Hae0.9 (right blot) probes. The EcoRI fragment of the AtrxWT allele (18.5 kb) has been replaced with the expected fragments of 11.2 kb (20/27 probe) or 8.5 kb (Hae0.9 probe)
16628246	(C) Southern blot analysis of SacI-digested DNA from either wild-type ES cells (E14) or targeted ES <andsystem-candidate> clones bearing the Atrxflox allele (1/F12 and 1/G11) or Cre-recombinant clones derived from these (1/F12B1F12 and 1/G11D5). The membrane was hybridised with the intron 17 probe indicated in (A). The expected bands of 6.2 (AtrxWT), 5.0 (Atrxflox), and 2.8 (AtrxΔ18Δneo) kb were observed.
16628246	(E) Western blot analysis of whole-<andsystem-candidate> extracts from the clones shown in (C) using an anti-ATRX monoclonal antibody (23C, raised against peptide A2 of the human ATRX protein shown in Figure 1). The full-length and truncated Atrx isoforms are indicated.
16628246	(A) GATA1-cre+/+ transgenic males were crossed to females of the ROSA26 reporter strain (ROSA26+/−), and embryos were recovered at 0.5 dpc (~16-<andsystem-candidate> morula stage) and stained with X-gal. Cre-mediated activation of the ROSA26 β-galactosidase reporter allele was detected in all cells in embryos in which both alleles are coinherited.
16628246	Paraffin sections of wild-type or Atrxnull 7.5 dpc embryos (dissected in their deciduas) were stained with haematoxylin (A) or with an anti-ATRX antibody (H-300, Figure 1) (B–E). Photomicrographs C–E show higher magnification images (200×) of the stained sections shown in (B) (40×). Scale bars represent 200 μm (40× magnification) or 40 μm (200× magnification). a, amnion; ac, amniotic cavity; c, chorion; e, epiblast; ec, ectoplacental cavity; ecc, exocoelomic cavity; ep, ectoplacental cone; ne, neural ectoderm; rm, Reichert's membrane; tgc, trophoblast giant <andsystem-candidate>.
16628246	Citation: Garrick D, Sharpe JA, Arkell R, Dobbie L, Smith AJH, et al. (2006) Loss of Atrx affects trophoblast development and the pattern of <andsystem-candidate>-inactivation in extraembryonic tissues. PLoS Genet 2(4): e58. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0020058
15314659	Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune disease characterised by the production of autoantibodies (auto-<andsystem-candidate>) against a wide spectrum of self-antigens, mainly from subcellular compartments, especially the cell nucleus. Genetic predisposition is an important contributor to susceptibility to SLE in both humans and animals (Vyse and Todd 1996; Harley et al. 1998; Theofilopoulos and Kono 1999; Wakeland et al. 2001). Genes in multiple pathways participate in mediating disease pathogenesis, and epistatic interactions amongst these genes influence the expression of disease. In this context, both genetic linkage studies in spontaneous lupus-prone models and synthetic murine models of autoimmunity generated by targeted disruption of specific genes modulating the immune system have widely been used to investigate the complexity of SLE.
15314659	Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune disease characterised by the production of autoantibodies (auto-Abs) against a wide spectrum of self-antigens, mainly from subcellular compartments, especially the <andsystem-candidate> nucleus. Genetic predisposition is an important contributor to susceptibility to SLE in both humans and animals (Vyse and Todd 1996; Harley et al. 1998; Theofilopoulos and Kono 1999; Wakeland et al. 2001). Genes in multiple pathways participate in mediating disease pathogenesis, and epistatic interactions amongst these genes influence the expression of disease. In this context, both genetic linkage studies in spontaneous lupus-prone models and synthetic murine models of autoimmunity generated by targeted disruption of specific genes modulating the immune system have widely been used to investigate the complexity of SLE.
15314659	To investigate the genetic basis of the lupus-like disease observed in the (129 × C57BL/6) hybrid mice, we generated two large cohorts of (129 × C57BL/6)F2 animals, one carrying a mutation in the Apcs gene, and monitored them for 1 y under identical environmental conditions. Since female mice in the original reports showed a higher penetrance of disease, the present study was conducted only on female mice. The results of the phenotypic analysis at 1 y of age are summarised in Tables 1 and 2. As previously reported (Botto et al. 1998), the wild-type (129 × C57BL/6)F2 mice developed lupus traits with elevated levels of auto-<andsystem-candidate>, starting from 6 mo of age (data not shown), and histological evidence of proliferative glomerulonephritis. In agreement with our previous observations (Bickerstaff et al. 1999), the titres of anti-nuclear Abs (ANAs) and anti-chromatin Ab were considerably greater in the (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− mice compared with the strain-matched controls. However, in contrast to our original findings, the levels of the other two disease serological markers analysed (anti-single-stranded DNA [ssDNA] and anti-double-stranded DNA [dsDNA] Abs) and the severity of the renal pathology were not different between the two experimental groups. In view of the possibility of an association between the fixed 129-derived segment flanking the mutated Apcs gene and the autoimmune traits observed, the genome-wide linkage analysis of the two experimental cohorts was carried out separately.
15314659	To investigate the genetic basis of the lupus-like disease observed in the (129 × C57BL/6) hybrid mice, we generated two large cohorts of (129 × C57BL/6)F2 animals, one carrying a mutation in the Apcs gene, and monitored them for 1 y under identical environmental conditions. Since female mice in the original reports showed a higher penetrance of disease, the present study was conducted only on female mice. The results of the phenotypic analysis at 1 y of age are summarised in Tables 1 and 2. As previously reported (Botto et al. 1998), the wild-type (129 × C57BL/6)F2 mice developed lupus traits with elevated levels of auto-Abs, starting from 6 mo of age (data not shown), and histological evidence of proliferative glomerulonephritis. In agreement with our previous observations (Bickerstaff et al. 1999), the titres of anti-nuclear Abs (ANAs) and anti-chromatin <andsystem-candidate> were considerably greater in the (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− mice compared with the strain-matched controls. However, in contrast to our original findings, the levels of the other two disease serological markers analysed (anti-single-stranded DNA [ssDNA] and anti-double-stranded DNA [dsDNA] Abs) and the severity of the renal pathology were not different between the two experimental groups. In view of the possibility of an association between the fixed 129-derived segment flanking the mutated Apcs gene and the autoimmune traits observed, the genome-wide linkage analysis of the two experimental cohorts was carried out separately.
15314659	The quantitative trait linkage (QTL) analysis identified several intervals on Chromosome 1 with linkage to disease serological markers, and these regions were all derived from the 129 mouse strain (see Table 3; Figures 4 and 5). Interestingly, whilst ANA and anti-chromatin <andsystem-candidate> levels showed suggestive or significant linkages only to the telomeric region of Chromosome 1, with an estimated peak occurring at a position approximately 90 cM near the Apcs gene, anti-dsDNA or anti-ssDNA Ab production was also linked to other segments on Chromosome 1, indicating a more complex genetic contribution from the 129 mouse strain.
15314659	Guided by these observations, we investigated whether the increased levels of ANA and anti-chromatin <andsystem-candidate> observed in the Apcs−/− mice were caused by a gene(s) within the fixed 129 region surrounding the mutated Apcs gene, rather than caused by the mutated Apcs gene itself. We compared the levels of these auto-Abs between all (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− mice and a group of 33 wild-type mice that were selected for being homozygous 129 in the region of Chromosome 1 between microsatellites D1Mit105 and D1Mit 223 (80–106 cM) (Figure 6A–6D). In contrast to the results reported in Table 1, this comparison showed no significant differences between the two experimental groups. This result demonstrates that, most likely, the 129-derived region and not the lack of Apcs was mediating the production of ANA and anti-chromatin Ab. Consistent with this explanation, we found that the 129 mice have significantly higher levels of Apcs in circulation compared with the C57BL/6 mice (median, 83 mg/l; range, 25–208; n = 16 versus median, 5 mg/l; range, 4–9; n = 10, respectively; p < 0.0001). The C57BL/6 strain has previously been reported to be one of the murine strains defined as low Apcs producers (Pepys et al. 1979; Baltz et al. 1980). In addition, sequence analysis of the entire Apcs coding region in both strains failed to identify any coding sequence polymorphisms in the Apcs gene (data not shown), indicating that a structural variant of the protein is unlikely to be the explanation for our findings. This is consistent with a previous report by Drake et al. (1996) that showed no Apcs coding sequence differences amongst several autoimmune and nonautoimmune murine strains.
15314659	Guided by these observations, we investigated whether the increased levels of ANA and anti-chromatin Ab observed in the Apcs−/− mice were caused by a gene(s) within the fixed 129 region surrounding the mutated Apcs gene, rather than caused by the mutated Apcs gene itself. We compared the levels of these auto-<andsystem-candidate> between all (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− mice and a group of 33 wild-type mice that were selected for being homozygous 129 in the region of Chromosome 1 between microsatellites D1Mit105 and D1Mit 223 (80–106 cM) (Figure 6A–6D). In contrast to the results reported in Table 1, this comparison showed no significant differences between the two experimental groups. This result demonstrates that, most likely, the 129-derived region and not the lack of Apcs was mediating the production of ANA and anti-chromatin Ab. Consistent with this explanation, we found that the 129 mice have significantly higher levels of Apcs in circulation compared with the C57BL/6 mice (median, 83 mg/l; range, 25–208; n = 16 versus median, 5 mg/l; range, 4–9; n = 10, respectively; p < 0.0001). The C57BL/6 strain has previously been reported to be one of the murine strains defined as low Apcs producers (Pepys et al. 1979; Baltz et al. 1980). In addition, sequence analysis of the entire Apcs coding region in both strains failed to identify any coding sequence polymorphisms in the Apcs gene (data not shown), indicating that a structural variant of the protein is unlikely to be the explanation for our findings. This is consistent with a previous report by Drake et al. (1996) that showed no Apcs coding sequence differences amongst several autoimmune and nonautoimmune murine strains.
15314659	Female Chromosome 1 congenic mice (C57BL/6.129[D1Mit105–223]), together with sex-matched Apcs−/− mice backcrossed onto C57BL/6 for ten generations (C57BL/6.Apcs−/−) and C57BL/6 controls, were monitored for the presence of lupus. In the C57BL/6.Apcs−/− mice, the 129 genome around the Apcs locus was mapped as a stretch of approximately 17 cM, positioned from 87.9 cM (D1Mit15) to 105 cM (D1Mit17). Thus, the congenic line carried a similar 129 region (80–106 cM) to the one present in the C57BL/6.Apcs−/− mice (87.9–105 cM). At 1 y of age, all animals were sacrificed, the auto-<andsystem-candidate> assessed, and the renal histology examined. The results of this analysis are shown in Figure 8. As previously reported (Bickerstaff et al. 1999), the levels of auto-Abs were markedly increased in the C57BL/6.Apcs−/− compared to the wild-type C57BL/6 controls. However, the C57BL/6.129(D1Mit105–223) animals also expressed high levels of auto-Abs, and these titres were not different from those detected in the matched congenic mice containing a null mutation of the Apcs gene. These results clearly demonstrated that epistatic interactions between 129 loci on Chromosome 1 and C57BL/6 genes were sufficient to mediate the loss of tolerance to nuclear autoantigens. However, in contrast to the serological data, the histological assessment of the kidneys showed evidence of markedly increased glomerulonephritis in the C57BL/6.Apcs−/− compared to both control groups (Figure 9), suggesting that the lack of Apcs, when combined with other C57BL/6 susceptibility alleles, can induce the development of severe renal damage.
15314659	The influence of background genes on the development of spontaneous autoimmune disease is well known, especially with respect to the lpr and Yaa disease-susceptibility genes. In MRL/Mp mice, the presence of the lpr gene accelerates the development of high level and broad-spectrum auto-<andsystem-candidate> production and lethal glomerulonephritis, in addition to marked lymphoproliferative disease. In contrast, homozygosity of the lpr gene in other strains such as C57BL/6, AKR, LG/J, and C3H leads only to auto-Ab production (Izui et al. 1984). Similarly, the Y-chromosome-linked Yaa gene in BXSB and MRL/Mp males enhances the rapid development of auto-Abs and glomerulonephritis (Izui et al. 1988; Merino et al. 1989). However, in the C57BL/6 background, the Yaa gene does not lead to an autoimmune phenotype (Izui et al. 1988). Not surprisingly, important effects of the genetic background on the expression of autoimmunity have also been reported in gene-targeted mice (Bolland and Ravetch 2000; Santiago-Raber et al. 2001; Mitchell et al. 2002). Thus, SLE exists as a complex-trait disorder in which specific combinations of susceptibility alleles are required for the expression of the full phenotype.
15314659	The influence of background genes on the development of spontaneous autoimmune disease is well known, especially with respect to the lpr and Yaa disease-susceptibility genes. In MRL/Mp mice, the presence of the lpr gene accelerates the development of high level and broad-spectrum auto-Ab production and lethal glomerulonephritis, in addition to marked lymphoproliferative disease. In contrast, homozygosity of the lpr gene in other strains such as C57BL/6, AKR, LG/J, and C3H leads only to auto-Ab production (Izui et al. 1984). Similarly, the Y-chromosome-linked Yaa gene in BXSB and MRL/Mp males enhances the rapid development of auto-<andsystem-candidate> and glomerulonephritis (Izui et al. 1988; Merino et al. 1989). However, in the C57BL/6 background, the Yaa gene does not lead to an autoimmune phenotype (Izui et al. 1988). Not surprisingly, important effects of the genetic background on the expression of autoimmunity have also been reported in gene-targeted mice (Bolland and Ravetch 2000; Santiago-Raber et al. 2001; Mitchell et al. 2002). Thus, SLE exists as a complex-trait disorder in which specific combinations of susceptibility alleles are required for the expression of the full phenotype.
15314659	This was confirmed by the mapping study reported here. We showed that there are multiple genetic loci contributing to the disease and these are derived from both 129 and C57BL/6 mice. We demonstrated that a 129-derived segment of Chromosome 1 was strongly linked to the expression of auto-<andsystem-candidate>. This region is probably capable of causing the initiation of a humoral autoimmune response to nuclear antigens; however, this response does not occur in the absence of C57BL/6 genes. In support of this, we identified a C57BL/6 segment on Chromosome 3, which may interact with the 129 genes on Chromosome 1 to mediate the loss of tolerance. Interestingly, although the C57BL/6 SLE-susceptibility region on Chromosome 3 is novel, disease-modifying alleles derived from C57BL/10 and C57BL/6 strains have been mapped to a portion of Chromosome 3 close to the region identified in this study (Morel et al. 1999; Haywood et al. 2000). Furthermore, the region on Chromosome 7 associated with the development of lupus nephritis has been linked to the same trait in other murine models of SLE (Santiago et al. 1998; Morel et al. 1999; Xie et al. 2002), suggesting the possibility of shared susceptibility loci.
15314659	In the context of SLE susceptibility, one of the most consistently mapped non-<andsystem-candidate> regions of the mouse genome is the telomeric Chromosome 1 segment, where several disease loci, designated Sle1 (Morel et al. 2001), Nba2 (Drake et al. 1995; Rozzo et al. 1996; Vyse et al. 1997), and Bxs3 (Hogarth et al. 1998), have been mapped in lupus-prone strains. Moreover, this region of mouse Chromosome 1 is orthologous to a region on human Chromosome 1q22–1q25, which has also been linked with human SLE (Moser et al. 1998).
15314659	The Apcs gene is one of the candidate genes known to lie within this region. The human serum amyloid P component binds avidly to DNA, chromatin, and apoptotic cells in physiological conditions in vitro (Pepys 1974; Pepys and Butler 1987; Butler et al. 1990) and also to exposed chromatin and apoptotic cells in vivo (Hintner et al. 1988; Breathnach et al. 1989; Familian et al. 2001). We have previously reported that (129 × C57BL/6).Apcs−/− mice spontaneously produce a wide range of ANAs and develop significant immune complex glomerulonephritis (Bickerstaff et al. 1999). On the basis of these observations, it was postulated that Apcs, by altering the clearance of chromatin, contributes to the pathogenesis of SLE. However, in this study we found that only ANA and anti-chromatin <andsystem-candidate> levels were significantly increased in the (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− mice. A possible explanation for this discrepancy may lie in the fact that the Apcs−/− mice analysed in the original study were generated from a limited number of founders and that this may have caused a nonrandom inheritance of the loci from the parental strains. Furthermore, the whole-genome analysis identified the 129 region surrounding the Apcs gene as the main locus contributing to the development of ANA and anti-chromatin Ab. In agreement with this, when we carried out a selective comparison between the (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− mice and Chromosome 1 genetically matched controls, we failed to detect any significant difference in the levels of these two auto-Abs. These findings, taken together, indicated that the phenotype associated with Apcs deficiency was caused by the presence of unaltered 129 genes from the telomeric region of Chromosome 1 operating in the C57BL/6 genomic background. Strong supportive evidence for this was provided by the analysis of the C57BL/6 mice congenic for this 129 region.
15314659	The Apcs gene is one of the candidate genes known to lie within this region. The human serum amyloid P component binds avidly to DNA, chromatin, and apoptotic cells in physiological conditions in vitro (Pepys 1974; Pepys and Butler 1987; Butler et al. 1990) and also to exposed chromatin and apoptotic cells in vivo (Hintner et al. 1988; Breathnach et al. 1989; Familian et al. 2001). We have previously reported that (129 × C57BL/6).Apcs−/− mice spontaneously produce a wide range of ANAs and develop significant immune complex glomerulonephritis (Bickerstaff et al. 1999). On the basis of these observations, it was postulated that Apcs, by altering the clearance of chromatin, contributes to the pathogenesis of SLE. However, in this study we found that only ANA and anti-chromatin Ab levels were significantly increased in the (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− mice. A possible explanation for this discrepancy may lie in the fact that the Apcs−/− mice analysed in the original study were generated from a limited number of founders and that this may have caused a nonrandom inheritance of the loci from the parental strains. Furthermore, the whole-genome analysis identified the 129 region surrounding the Apcs gene as the main locus contributing to the development of ANA and anti-chromatin Ab. In agreement with this, when we carried out a selective comparison between the (129 × C57BL/6)F2.Apcs−/− mice and Chromosome 1 genetically matched controls, we failed to detect any significant difference in the levels of these two auto-<andsystem-candidate>. These findings, taken together, indicated that the phenotype associated with Apcs deficiency was caused by the presence of unaltered 129 genes from the telomeric region of Chromosome 1 operating in the C57BL/6 genomic background. Strong supportive evidence for this was provided by the analysis of the C57BL/6 mice congenic for this 129 region.
15314659	The generation and analysis of congenic strains have successfully been used to dissect the contribution of individual susceptibility alleles to a multigenic trait such as SLE. We adopted the same strategy to investigate the relative contribution of the 129 Chromosome 1 segment and the Apcs gene to each disease trait. Using this approach, we demonstrated that the 129 interval on distal Chromosome 1, when transferred onto the C57BL/6 genome, a combination commonly created by backcrossing onto C57BL/6 a mutated gene located in that chromosomal region, was sufficient to mediate the production of auto-<andsystem-candidate>. In this context, it is of note that several strains of mice with targeted mutations of genes encoded in this region have been reported to express a lupus-like illness, including mice lacking FcγRIIB (Bolland and Ravetch 2000), complement receptors (CR1/2) (Prodeus et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2002), and decay-accelerating factor (CD55) (Miwa et al. 2002). In each case, the autoimmune phenotype was described in mice in which the null mutation was generated in 129 embryonic stem cells and then backcrossed to the C57BL/6 or another genetic background. Thus, in view of our findings, one may postulate that in each of these murine models of SLE, the effects of the targeted null gene were irrelevant. Similar conclusions may apply to other gene-targeted animals carrying mutations of genes mapped in the 129-derived susceptibility allele on Chromosome 7 (O'Keefe et al. 1996, 1999).
15314659	Sera, collected at 6 and 12 mo of age, were assayed for the presence of auto-<andsystem-candidate>. Levels of IgG ANA were sought by indirect immunofluorescence using Hep-2 cells, and anti-dsDNA Abs were detected by indirect immunofluorescence on Crithidia luciliae as previously described (Mitchell et al. 2002). Serum samples were screened at a 1:80 (ANA) or 1:20 (anti-dsDNA) dilution and the positive samples titrated to endpoint. Abs to ssDNA and anti-chromatin were measured by ELISA, as previously described (Mitchell et al. 2002). Samples were screened at a 1:100 dilution, and the results were expressed in arbitrary ELISA units (AEUs) relative to a standard positive sample (derived from an MRL/Mp.lpr/lpr mouse), which was assigned a value of 100. For interplate comparison, serial dilutions of a positive control serum sample were included on each plate. Apcs levels were assessed by ELISA using sheep anti-mouse Apcs and rabbit anti-mouse Apcs Abs (Calbiochem, Nottigham, United Kingdom). Samples were screened at a 1:3,000 dilution, and the results were expressed in milligrams per liters, referring to a standard curve derived from an acute-phase serum with a known concentration of Apcs (Calbiochem). Apcs−/− mouse serum was included as a negative control.
15314659	The QTL program MAPMANAGER.QTL (ftp://mcbio.med.buffalo.edu/pub/MapMgr/) was used, and the two experimental groups were examined independently. Only data from mice at 12 mo of age were analysed. Log transformations of auto-<andsystem-candidate> levels resulted in more normalised distribution and were used in QTL mapping. LOD thresholds for suggestive and significant linkages were determined by using a cohort- and trait-specific permutation test (1,000 permutations). The average threshold for suggestive, significant, and highly significant linkages were LOD ≥ 2.1 (p ≤ 7.8 × 10−3), LOD ≥ 3.6 (p ≤ 2.4 × 10−4), and LOD ≥ 5 (p ≤ 1 × 10−5), respectively (Manly and Olson 1999).
15314659	(C and D) Anti-chromatin <andsystem-candidate> levels expressed in AEUs related to a standard positive sample, which was assigned a value of 100 AEU. The comparison is between the same groups of mice as in (A) and (B), respectively. The symbols are as in (A).
17022820	The genes for Plg, PAI-1, and α2-antiplasmin reside on the three chromosomes identified for QTL for rebleeding time and may or may not be coincidental to the observed phenotypes found in the A/J mice and CSS. It is not likely that merely the concentration of these components explains the increased rebleeding time and reduced arterial occlusion time in the A/J mice. When compared to the B6 mice, the A/J mice and the three strains with elevated rebleeding time had variable Plg, PAI-1, and α2-antiplasmin. Two allelic forms of the mouse Plg gene have been reported for B6 and A/J mice [40]. Plg concentration was increased in A/J mice compared to B6 mice. Although we did not detect differences in Plg structure, this would not exclude possible functional differences. A congenic strain (specific for a homosomic region from A/J and the remaining <andsystem-candidate> and background is from B6 mice) of A/J chromosome 17 that includes the Plg gene was tested in the bleeding assay. Values for bleeding and rebleeding in this congenic strain were similar to values from B6 mice, indicating that the QTL is not Plg. There are genes for other proteases and matrix proteins that reside on chromosome 17 in addition to unknown genes. DNA base pair sequence data for the PAI-1 gene or the α2-antiplasmin gene in B6 and A/J mice have reported no differences [51], but regulatory genes upstream of the coding region may be important. Our results suggest that novel or unknown genes may interact with the Plg system components to modify their function.
17696610	It is critical that the chromosomes carried by sperm and eggs contain faithful representations of the genome of the individual that produced them. During the process of meiosis, the maternal and paternal copies of each chromosome “synapse” with each other (become tightly associated), exchange genetic material via the process of recombination, then separate into daughter cells in the first of two meiotic <andsystem-candidate> divisions. The intricate chromosome behavior is subject to errors, so most organisms have evolved meiotic “checkpoints” that monitor fidelity of chromosome synapsis and repair of DNA damage. These checkpoints cause defective cells to self destruct rather than generate defective sperm or eggs. We studied the effects of deleting mouse Trip13, a gene that in distant organisms plays a key role in meiotic checkpoint control. These experiments revealed that instead of having a checkpoint role, Trip13 is required for one of the two major classes of recombination in meiosis that is required for repairing broken DNA molecules. The chromosomes still synapsed normally, but animals were sterile due to massive death of oocytes and spermatocytes. These results indicate that, in addition to a checkpoint that responds to failed synapsis, one exists to specifically detect unrepaired DNA damage that is due to failed recombination.
17696610	PCH2, encoding a nucleolar-localized AAA-ATPase that was originally identified in an S. cerevisiae genetic screen for mutants that relieve pachytene arrest of asynaptic zip1 mutants [8], was recently determined to be an essential component of the pachytene synapsis (but not DSB repair) checkpoint in yeast and worms [2,12]. PCH2 orthologs are present in organisms that undergo synaptic meiosis, but not asynaptic meiosis, prompting the suggestion that a Pch2-dependent checkpoint evolved to monitor synaptonemal complex (<andsystem-candidate>) defects from yeast to humans [12]. Here, we generated mice deficient for the Trip13, the ortholog of PCH2, and evaluated whether it also plays a role in the pachytene checkpoint. Surprisingly, while we found no evidence for checkpoint function, we did uncover a potential role for this protein in noncrossover (NCO) repair of meiotic DSBs.
17696610	(F) Localization of TRIP13 in testes. Wild-type (top) and mutant (bottom) testis sections were probed with chicken anti-TRIP13, and detected with HRP-conjugated anti-chicken IgG (brown/red staining). Expression in WT was most prominent in the nuclei of Type B spermatogonia (Sg), leptotene spermatocytes (LS), and early pachytene spermatocytes (PS), but not late pachytene spermatocytes (LP). No nuclear staining was seen in mutant testis sections, although reddish cytoplasmic background is present. Identification of <andsystem-candidate> types was judged in part by estimating the epithelial stage of the tubules as described [67].
17696610	To determine the germ <andsystem-candidate> types in which TRIP13 is expressed, and to assess possible expression in the mutant by means other than Western analysis, testis sections were immunolabeled for TRIP13 using a polyclonal chicken antipeptide antibody (see Materials and Methods). The most intensely labeled cells in control testes were Type B spermatogonia and leptotene spermatocytes (Figure 1F). Zygotene/pachytene spermatocytes stained less strongly, and there was no detectable staining in late pachytene spermatocytes. TRIP13 appeared to be nuclear localized. There was no such staining of nuclei in mutant seminiferous tubules (Figure 1F). To further assess the nuclear localization, TRIP13 was used to probe meiotic chromosomes prepared by surface spreading of spermatocyte nuclei. In wild type, there was diffuse nuclear staining, and no evidence of concentration on SC cores (marked by the axial element protein SYCP3) at any meiotic substage (Figure 1G). TRIP13 signal was noticeably absent in mutant meiotic nuclei.
17696610	To determine the germ cell types in which TRIP13 is expressed, and to assess possible expression in the mutant by means other than Western analysis, testis sections were immunolabeled for TRIP13 using a polyclonal chicken antipeptide antibody (see Materials and Methods). The most intensely labeled cells in control testes were Type B spermatogonia and leptotene spermatocytes (Figure 1F). Zygotene/pachytene spermatocytes stained less strongly, and there was no detectable staining in late pachytene spermatocytes. TRIP13 appeared to be nuclear localized. There was no such staining of nuclei in mutant seminiferous tubules (Figure 1F). To further assess the nuclear localization, TRIP13 was used to probe meiotic chromosomes prepared by surface spreading of spermatocyte nuclei. In wild type, there was diffuse nuclear staining, and no evidence of concentration on <andsystem-candidate> cores (marked by the axial element protein SYCP3) at any meiotic substage (Figure 1G). TRIP13 signal was noticeably absent in mutant meiotic nuclei.
17696610	Histological sections of mutant testes revealed a lack of postmeiotic <andsystem-candidate> types that are characteristic of wild-type seminiferous tubules (Figure 3E). The most developmentally advanced seminiferous tubules contained adluminal spermatocytes with condensed chromatin characteristic of pachynema (Figure 3F). The absence of coordinated spermatogenic progression beyond this stage is indicative of a pachytene arrest. This was revealed more clearly by chromosome analysis (see below). Some sections of adult seminiferous tubules contained postmeiotic spermatids (Figure 3G), although we saw no motile epididymal sperm. These drastic meiotic defects stand in contrast to yeast and C. elegans, in which deletion of Pch2 alone has minor effects on spore/gamete development [2,8].
17696610	To better characterize the degree of meiotic progression in Trip13Gt/Gt spermatocytes, we immunostained chromosome spreads for SYCP3 and SYCP1, components of the axial/lateral elements and transverse filaments, respectively, of the synaptonemal complex (<andsystem-candidate>). Pachytene spermatocyte nuclei from postpubertal mutant testes could assemble normal SC cores and exhibited full synapsis of chromosomes as judged by colabeling of SYCP1 and SYCP3 along the full lengths of all autosomes (Figure 4A). Additionally, the X and Y chromosomes were normally synapsed at their pseudoautosomal region. More prepubertal (17.5 d postpartum) mutant spermatocytes contained asynaptic or terminally asynapsed chromosomes than age-matched controls (62.5% versus 25%, respectively; Figure 4B). We attribute this to a delay in the first wave of postnatal spermatogenesis (Figure 2D and 2E), likely related to systemic developmental retardation (Figure 2A and 2B). Nevertheless, since Trip13Gt/Gt spermatocytes progress to pachynema with no gross SC abnormalities, and oocytes were eliminated soon after birth (a characteristic of DNA repair mutants [13]), this suggested that unrepaired DSBs are responsible for eventual meiotic arrest and elimination.
17696610	To elucidate the cause of meiotic arrest, we analyzed meiotic chromosomes with a variety of markers that are diagnostic of recombination and synapsis. Recombination in Trip13Gt/Gt spermatocytes appeared to initiate normally as judged by the presence of γH2AX in leptonema (Figure S2A and S2B), which reflects the presence of meiotically induced DSBs [18]. RAD51 and/or DMC1, components of early recombination nodules (<andsystem-candidate>), was also present as abundant foci in Trip13Gt/Gt zygotene spermatocytes (unpublished data; the anti-RAD51 antibody cross-reacts with DMC1), indicating that recombinational repair of DSBs is initiated. The cohesin complex, which is essential for completion and/or maintenance of synaptic associations, appeared to assemble normally as judged by immunolabeling for the meiosis-specific cohesins STAG3 (Figure S2C and S2D) and REC8 (unpublished data). Because yeast PCH2 localizes to telomeres in a Sir3p-dependent manner, we tested for possible telomere defects by immunolabeling for TRF2, a component of a protein complex that plays an essential role in telomere protection [19]. It was localized to telomeres of both fully synapsed and telomerically asynaptic mutant chromosomes (Figure S2E and S2F).
17696610	To assess whether these MLH1/3 foci in Trip13Gt/Gt pachytene spermatocytes represent CO events completed to a point where they could maintain interhomolog attachments though the end of prophase I, we treated testicular cells from 17.5–20.5-d-old control (+/+), Trip13Gt/Gt, and Dmc1−/− mice with the protein phosphatase inhibitor okadaic acid (OA), a chemical that induces degradation of the <andsystem-candidate>, chromosome condensation, and premature progression to metaphase I [33]. Fifteen metaphase spreads were identified for each genotype. Whereas all of the Dmc1−/− spreads had ∼35 or more condensed chromosomes, all of the +/+ and Trip13Gt/Gt spreads had 20–25, suggesting that the MLH1/3 foci in Trip13Gt/Gt pachytene spermatocytes represent sites of completed, or near-completed, COs. Because the preparations were made from whole testes, it is possible that the univalent-containing metaphases from Dmc1−/− mice were from spermatogonia, not spermatocytes.
17696610	Regarding the cause of <andsystem-candidate> death in Trip13 mutants, our data indicate that this is triggered by defective DSB repair rather than asynapsis. We base this conclusion on two observations: (1) oocyte elimination is dependent upon DSB formation and (2) synapsis is normal in spermatocytes of adult testes. Indeed, this mutant is unique in that recombination defects occur in the absence of asynapsis (e.g., as in Dmc1 knockouts). Thus, the Trip13 mutant provides the first evidence that unrepaired DNA damage alone can trigger the mammalian pachytene checkpoint response. Furthermore, our results allow us to conclude that oocytes and spermatocytes share a similar, if not identical, DNA damage pachytene checkpoint that is decoupled from a synapsis checkpoint.
17696610	TRIP13 was originally discovered to be an interactor with rat thyroid receptor beta (THRB; [54]), but the relationship between THRB and TRIP13 in meiosis is unknown. Interestingly, we observed that THRB is distributed diffusely throughout wild-type spermatocyte nuclei but is excluded from the XY (sex) body (unpublished observations), a compartmentalized nuclear domain beginning in pachynema, in which the sex chromosomes become heterochromatinized and transcriptionally silenced in the process of MSCI [55]. However, the XY body appeared intact in most mutant spermatocytes upon probing with several markers of <andsystem-candidate> heterochromatinization (unpublished observations). Considering that THRB knockout mice are viable and fertile [56], the functional relationship between TRIP13 and its receptor THRB in meiosis is unclear.
17696610	The mouse embryonic stem <andsystem-candidate> line RRB047 (strain 129/Ola) containing a gene trap insertion in Trip13 was obtained from BayGenomics (http://www.baygenomics.ucsf.edu/). The gene-trapping vector used to create this line, pGT1lxf, was designed to create an in-frame fusion between the 5′ exons of the trapped gene and a reporter, βgeo (a fusion of β-galactosidase and neomycin phosphotransferase II). The gene-trapped locus creates a fusion transcript containing exons 1–3 of Trip13 and βgeo. To identify the exact insertion site within intron 3, PCR was performed using one primer within the gene trap vector, and the other primer at various positions in intron 3 pointing towards the 3′ end of the gene. Product from a productive reaction was sequenced, revealing that the insertion site was 445 bp into intron 3.
16670015	The hg modifier QTL located within the HG17 strain had large effects on growth, body length and carcass components. The most intriguing candidate gene located in the congenic is Sstr5. Somatostatin is a potent inhibitor of Gh and Sstr5 is one of five receptors which mediate these effects [45,46]. Ubiquitous and pancreatic beta <andsystem-candidate> specific knockout of Sstr5 leads to alterations in insulin secretion and glucose homeostasis [47,48].
15819996	Annexin A7 is expressed in cells of the developing brain where a change in its subcellular localization from cytoplasm to nucleus was observed. In the adult CNS, the subcellular distribution of Annexin A7 depends on the <andsystem-candidate> type. By immunohistochemistry analysis Annexin A7 was detected in the cytosol of undifferentiated cells at embryonic days E5–E8. At E11–E15 the protein is still present in the cytosol of cells predominantly located in the ventricular germinative zone surrounding the lateral ventricle. Later on, at embryonic day E16, Annexin A7 in cells of the intermediate and marginal zone of the neopallium translocates to the nucleus. Neuronal cells of all areas in the adult brain present Annexin A7 in the nucleus, whereas glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)-positive astrocytes exhibit both, a cytoplasmic and nuclear staining. The presence of nuclear Annexin A7 was confirmed by extraction of the nucleoplasm from isolated nuclei obtained from neuronal and astroglial cell lines.
15819996	Immunohistochemistry confirmed the presence of the protein during early development. Annexin A7 immunoreactivity using mAb 203–217, which specifically recognizes both isoforms of Annexin A7, can be observed in the two <andsystem-candidate> types of the cylinder stage at E5 with a weaker Annexin A7 expression in the ectoderm (Fig. 2A–C). At E8 Annexin A7 can be detected in almost all tissues of the embryo (data not shown). A correlation between the presence of Annexin A7 and the origin of a cell type from one of the three germ layers is not apparent. We specifically noted the localization of the protein in the neuroepithelium of the neural fold and tube (Fig. 2D–F, proximal, E8; Fig. 2G–I, distal, E13). At the subcellular level, Annexin A7 was present in punctate structures mainly in the cytosol of all examined cells (Fig. 2E,F). This distribution was also observed during subsequent development.
15819996	Annexin A7 immunoreactivity in early mouse embryos. (A) Phase contrast, embryo E5: The egg cylinder consists of an inner <andsystem-candidate> mass (a) representing the ectoderm and an outer layer of endoderm cells (b). (B) Immunostaining of the paraffin section was performed using purified mAb 203–217 and Cy3-conjugated anti-mouse IgG. Annexin A7 is expressed in both cell types of the egg cylinder with a strong staining of the endoderm and a weaker staining of the ectoderm. The nuclei are devoid of immune reactions. (C) Negative control using the secondary Cy3-antibody only. (D-F) Annexin A7 expression in the proximal neural tube (D) and nearby neural fold (E,F), embryo E8, transverse section. Immunolabeling of Annexin A7 was performed with purified mAb 203–217 and visualization was with an Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-mouse IgG. (D) An intense Annexin A7 immunostaining is detectable in the neuroepithelium of the neural tube (a, lumen of neural tube). (E,F) Higher magnifications of the neuroepithelium show that Annexin A7 is expressed in the cytosol. Arrowheads point to Annexin A7 immunoreactivity in the cytosol. (G) Phase contrast, embryo E13, caudal neural tube. (H) Immunostaining of the paraffin section was performed using purified mAb 203–217 and Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-mouse IgG. (I) Negative control using the secondary Alexa Fluor 488-antibody only. Bar, 20 μm.
15819996	Both Annexin A7 isoforms are found in adult brain tissue (Fig. 1B). In general, we observed two characteristic staining patterns for Annexin A7, a prominent nuclear stain in neurons (determined by lack of GFAP-immunoreactivity, localization, morphology) and a cytoplasmic and nuclear stain in astrocytes (GFAP-positive) in all areas of the mature murine brain. In the neocortex (isocortex) Annexin A7 was strongly enriched in nuclei of neurons of all six cortical laminae (Fig. 4A, section derived from cortex temporalis). For control, in the adult brain type-1 astrocytes can be characterized by a positive GFAP-stain (Fig. 4B). Fig. 4F demonstrates the presence of nuclear Annexin A7 in a neocortical neuron of the external granular layer (layer II) and in an astrocytic <andsystem-candidate> of the neocortical molecular layer (layer I) which additionally exhibits an intense signal in the cytoplasm and in cellular branches. A further cell type of the isocortex showed a strong immunoreactivity in both, nucleus and cytosol, and was identified as pyramidal neuron based on morphology and absence of GFAP immunoreactivity. However, Annexin A7 apparently is more enriched in the nucleus (Fig. 4E).
15819996	An equal staining of Annexin A7 was also found in the cerebellum (Fig. 5A). Nuclei of neurons in the stratum granulosum show the most prominent staining (Fig. 5C,D). In the stratum moleculare, which is poor in <andsystem-candidate> bodies of neurons, only a few dots appear which also correspond to nuclei of neurons. Astrocytes are also positive for Annexin A7 in the nuclei and cytoplasm (data not shown). The signal of the pial border and the prominent stain of the white matter tracts (laminae medullares) are due to Annexin A7 positive astrocytes (Fig. 5 A–C). Higher magnification of the boundary layer between stratum moleculare and granulosum (Fig. 5D) revealed an Annexin A7 signal in nuclei, but also in the cytoplasm and at the plasma membrane of Purkinje cells (Fig. 5E). The typical pair of dendrites points to the margin of the cerebellar cortex. The specificity of the Annexin A7 signal was further confirmed in similar brain sections of the AnxA7-/- mouse (Fig. 5F). Fig. 5G shows Annexin A7 in neurites (axons) connecting the laminae medullares with the Purkinje-cell layer. Most likely these are the axons of the Purkinje-cells. Apart from these efferent neurites the laminae medullares (lamina alba, white matter) contain afferent mossy and climbing fibers. Thus, the intense stain of the cerebellar white matter arises from Annexin A7 located in astrocytes and neurites.
15819996	Annexin A7 immunostaining in the cerebellum of adult mice. (A) Low magnification of the cerebellum presents an Annexin A7 expression mainly in cells of the stratum granulosum and laminae medullares. (B) Corresponding section stained for GFAP. (C) Higher magnification of folia of the cerebellum, where a polyclonal anti-AnnexinA7 antibody was used; square, a higher magnification of acorresponding area stained with mAb 203–217 is given in (D). Between stratum granulosum and stratum moleculare the layer of Purkinje-cells (stratum neuronorum piriformium (ganglionare)) can be observed. (D) Staining of the band of Purkinje-cells (arrows). The positive Annexin A7-stain in the stratum granulosum is due to staining of the nuclei of neurons. (E) In addition to an intense staining of the nucleus, the <andsystem-candidate> body is AnnexinA7-positive including both dendrites of the Purkinje-cell shown. (F) Corresponding section from an AnxA7-/- mouse. (G) AnnexinA7 staining of axons (arrowheads) running from the laminae medullares to the Purkinje-cell layer located in the round end of a convolution. Sections A, D, E, F, G were stained with mAb 203–217.
15819996	Annexin A7 immunostaining in human isocortex. (A) Pyramidal neurons (bold arrow) and apical dendrites (small arrows) were clearly labeled with the antibody against Annexin A7 in the human parietal cortex. (B) A dendritic staining was also seen in the molecular layer (small arrows). In addition the subpial astrocytes were weakly labeled (double headed arrows). The staining was cytoplasmic, only few astrocytes showed a nuclear staining as well (inset). (C) Enlargement of (A): Annexin A7 was seen at the <andsystem-candidate> membrane of the perikaryon (bold arrow) and the apical dendrite (small arrows). (D) A blank control lacking the primary antibody did not show a specific labeling, but autofluorescent lipofuscin was detectable in the neurons (arrowheads). Bar, (A) 70 μm, (B) 50 μm, (B-inset, C) 17 μm, (D) 20 μm.
15819996	To verify the presence of endogenous Annexin A7 in nuclei, we used a biochemical approach and purified nuclei from neuro-2a, PC-12, and C6 cells and treated them with a hypotonic extraction buffer to obtain the nucleoplasm (Fig. 7A). The nucleoplasm and the remaining nuclei, from which the nucleoplasm has been extracted partially, were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. Western blots probed with mAb 203–217 showed Annexin A7 in the nucleoplasm of neuronal (neuro-2a, PC-12) and astroglial (C6) <andsystem-candidate> lines (Fig. 7A), however, the large isoform could only be clearly extracted with nucleoplasm from C6 cells. For control, antibodies against LAP2α, Emerin and tubulin were used to verify that the nucleoplasm (marker:LAP2α, which is anon-membrane-bound isoform of LAP2) was successfully extracted and also not contaminated by nuclear membranes (marker:Emerin) or by cytoplasm (marker:tubulin). Likewise, in these neuronal and astroglial cell lines Annexin A7 had been observed in the nucleus by immunofluorescence (Fig. 7B and data not shown). We noticed no difference between PC-12 and neuro-2a cells, however, as for the brain sections, we found an increase of the Annexin A7 staining after pre-treatment with trypsin.
15819996	Nuclear localization of Annexin A7. (A) Extraction of Annexin A7 from nuclei of neuronal (PC-12, N2A) and an astroglial (C6) <andsystem-candidate> line using a hypotonic buffer. Samples of total cells (c), and corresponding amounts of nuclear membranes (m) and nucleoplasm (p) were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. Annexin A7 (AnxA7) isoforms are extractable from the nucleus of the indicated cells (47 kDa and 51 kDa isoform, arrowhead). For control, immunoblotting of LAP2α (75 kDa; non-membrane-bound isoform), Emerin (EM, 34 kDa), and tubulin (TB, 55 kDa) which are specific for nucleoplasm (LAP2α), nuclear membranes (Emerin), and the cytoplasm (tubulin) are shown. Note that the nucleoplasm is only partially extractable. (B) Immunofluorescence images of the PC-12 cells used. Cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with Triton X-100, pretreated with trypsin as indicated, and stained with Annexin A7 specific mAb 203–217, DAPI in blue, bar 10 μm.
15819996	Nuclear localization of Annexin A7. (A) Extraction of Annexin A7 from nuclei of neuronal (PC-12, N2A) and an astroglial (C6) cell line using a hypotonic buffer. Samples of total cells (c), and corresponding amounts of nuclear membranes (<andsystem-candidate>) and nucleoplasm (p) were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. Annexin A7 (AnxA7) isoforms are extractable from the nucleus of the indicated cells (47 kDa and 51 kDa isoform, arrowhead). For control, immunoblotting of LAP2α (75 kDa; non-membrane-bound isoform), Emerin (EM, 34 kDa), and tubulin (TB, 55 kDa) which are specific for nucleoplasm (LAP2α), nuclear membranes (Emerin), and the cytoplasm (tubulin) are shown. Note that the nucleoplasm is only partially extractable. (B) Immunofluorescence images of the PC-12 cells used. Cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with Triton X-100, pretreated with trypsin as indicated, and stained with Annexin A7 specific mAb 203–217, DAPI in blue, bar 10 μm.
15819996	Nuclear localization of Annexin A7. (A) Extraction of Annexin A7 from nuclei of neuronal (PC-12, N2A) and an astroglial (C6) cell line using a hypotonic buffer. Samples of total cells (c), and corresponding amounts of nuclear membranes (m) and nucleoplasm (<andsystem-candidate>) were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. Annexin A7 (AnxA7) isoforms are extractable from the nucleus of the indicated cells (47 kDa and 51 kDa isoform, arrowhead). For control, immunoblotting of LAP2α (75 kDa; non-membrane-bound isoform), Emerin (EM, 34 kDa), and tubulin (TB, 55 kDa) which are specific for nucleoplasm (LAP2α), nuclear membranes (Emerin), and the cytoplasm (tubulin) are shown. Note that the nucleoplasm is only partially extractable. (B) Immunofluorescence images of the PC-12 cells used. Cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with Triton X-100, pretreated with trypsin as indicated, and stained with Annexin A7 specific mAb 203–217, DAPI in blue, bar 10 μm.
15819996	Nuclear localization of Annexin A7. (A) Extraction of Annexin A7 from nuclei of neuronal (PC-12, N2A) and an astroglial (C6) cell line using a hypotonic buffer. Samples of total cells (c), and corresponding amounts of nuclear membranes (m) and nucleoplasm (p) were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. Annexin A7 (AnxA7) isoforms are extractable from the nucleus of the indicated cells (47 kDa and 51 kDa isoform, arrowhead). For control, immunoblotting of LAP2α (75 kDa; non-membrane-bound isoform), Emerin (EM, 34 kDa), and tubulin (<andsystem-candidate>, 55 kDa) which are specific for nucleoplasm (LAP2α), nuclear membranes (Emerin), and the cytoplasm (tubulin) are shown. Note that the nucleoplasm is only partially extractable. (B) Immunofluorescence images of the PC-12 cells used. Cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with Triton X-100, pretreated with trypsin as indicated, and stained with Annexin A7 specific mAb 203–217, DAPI in blue, bar 10 μm.
15819996	In the developing brain we noted a striking change in the subcellular distribution of Annexin A7. Cells in the stratum germinativum of the neopallial cortex, which surrounds the lateral ventricle, show at E13 and E15 a staining for Annexin A7 mainly in the cytosol. But this staining largely disappears and at the following day E16 we detect Annexin A7 in the nucleus of cells in the intermediate and marginal zone of the neopallium. The different expression patterns of Annexin A7-positive cells from the ventricular germinative zone to the marginal zone of the later neocortex observed in this study are similar to the developmental patterns of Tenascin-C-positive astroglial precursors following the guidance of the radial glial cells [18]. Moreover, the patterns resemble that of migrating and differentiated neurons described by Berry et al. [13]. Neurons that are generated prenatally in the proliferative ventricular layer of the neopallial cortex subsequently migrate through the intermediate zone to form the different cortical <andsystem-candidate> layers in a declining inside-out gradient of cell maturation. These observations suggested that the subcellular localization of Annexin A7 depends on developmental stage and cell type.
15819996	In the adult brain we generally observed a nuclear localization for Annexin A7 in neurons whereas astrocytes exhibited both a cytosolic as well as a nuclear staining. However, pyramidal neurons of the isocortex and Purkinje-cells of the cerebellum exhibited a cytosolic stain of intermediate intensity including their neurites and dendrites. We have previously reported the expression of Annexin A7 in human temporal neocortex and hippocampus obtained from neurosurgery for therapy-refractory epilepsy and found the two Annexin A7 isoforms restricted to the cytoplasm and nuclei of astrocytes, whereas neurons lacked any signal [19]. The hippocampal area showed typical signs of Ammon's horn sclerosis, but the adjacent temporal neocortex tissue did not show any histopathological alterations. This data is in discrepancy with our actual observation in the murine brain. To determine if this is due to different methods in immunofluorescence staining or indeed different expression patterns in mouse and human, we repeated the immunofluorescence of human brain. This time we investigated sections from human parietal cortex of autopsy brain. The astroglial expression of Annexin A7 could be confirmed, although not all astrocytes exhibited the nuclear staining. Pyramidal neurons however indicated a distinct staining of Annexin A7 most prominent along their dendrites. The different results obtained for the neurons may be explained by the fact that we previously used frozen tissue sections or that they were derived from patients suffering from temporal lobe epilepsia. On the other hand the actual human brain tissue used was from aged patients and did not correspond to the age of the mice included in this study. In cultured cells after <andsystem-candidate> damage or apoptosis (unpublished observations) or in cells treated with a Ca2+-ionophore Annexin A7 translocated from the cytoplasm to cellular membranes [19]. We therefore favor the hypothesis that Annexin A7 in the sensitive neurons of the human autopsy brain may have similarly translocated to the cellular membrane. This property of translocation and membrane binding is common to all annexins and commercially available kits for apoptosis detection employ recombinant AnnexinA5. The presence of nuclear Annexin A7 in murine brain was confirmed by controls using sections from the AnxA7-/- mouse and by a biochemical extraction of the protein from the nucleus. Both Annexin A7 isoforms described in brain tissue seemingly are expressed by neurons and astrocytes, which was shown using total cell extracts of cultured neuo-2a, PC-12, and C6 cells. In addition to their expression in brain, both Annexin A7 isoforms have only been described in heart muscle and red blood cells [5-8].
15819996	Although the inactivation of the annexin A7 gene did not interfere with the viability and development of knock out mice [10], their generation allowed us to address the role of Annexin A7 in specific <andsystem-candidate> types [8,9]. Indeed, when we analyzed primary astrocytes from an AnxA7-/- mouse for Ca2+-dependent signaling processes, we found that they exhibited a significantly increased velocity of mechanically induced astrocytic Ca2+-waves as compared to wild type [9]. This led us to propose, that Annexin A7 can act as a Ca2+-buffer and is involved in Ca2+-homeostasis. In neurons Ca2+ ions play major roles in various physiological and pathophysiological processes [20-25]. One can speculate about an involvement of Annexin A7 in the regulation of these Ca2+-dependent processes, propositions that need further investigation. However, such roles are confirmed for heart function by studies of Schrickel et al. [submitted], who described an involvement of Annexin A7 in the maintenance of a regular cardiac electrophysiology and Ca2+-homeostasis.
15819996	None of the annexins contains a typical nuclear localization signal and their mechanism of nuclear import remains to be elucidated. For Annexin A11 it was shown that nuclear localization is mediated by its N-terminal region, which also contains a binding side for the S100 protein calcyclin [29]. More recently Tomas and Moss [32] showed, that Annexin A11 and S100A6 assemble at the nuclear envelope during nuclear breakdown. Their role in this process is not known. In general it seems that the nuclear localization of the annexins is actively regulated. For example the nucleocytoplasmic compartmentalization of Annexin A2 is controlled by sequestration of the AnxA2/p11 complex modulated by phosphorylation and by a nuclear export signal found in the AnxA2 3–12 region [33]. One function of Annexin A2 in the nucleus, that appears not to involve binding of p11, has been suggested by its purification as part of a primer recognition protein complex that enhances DNA polymeraseα-activity in vitro [34]. The annexins may participate in a nuclear response to initial <andsystem-candidate> stimulation or to a Ca2+-transient, presumably by regulating DNA replication. For Annexin A7 such a pathway is very speculative at the moment. Future studies are however directed by these findings and will concentrate on the identification of the nuclear localization signal of Annexin A7 as well as on the role of Annexin A7 in the nuclear compartment.
15819996	In this article we report the translocation of Annexin A7 to nuclei of differentiating cells in the developing murine brain. In the adult brain Annexin A7 generally was detected in nuclei of neurons. Astrocytes, cerebellar Purkinje-cells and neocortical pyramidal neurons exhibited both, Annexin A7 in the cytosol and in the nuclei. Thus, the subcellular localisation of Annexin A7 depends on the developmental stage and the <andsystem-candidate> type. A role of Annexin A7 as well as of other annexins in nuclei remains speculative. The results obtained by immunofluorescence were confirmed by extraction of Annexin A7 from nuclei of neuronal and glial cell lines.
15819996	The <andsystem-candidate> lines used were cultured according to the instructions provided by ATCC: murine neuroblastoma neuro-2a (ATCC CCL-131), rat pheochromocytoma PC-12 (ATCC CRL-1721), and rat glioblastoma C6 (ATCC CCL-107). One day before fixation with 4%paraformaldehyde and permeabilization with 0.5% Triton X-100, cells were seeded on coverslips. Immunostaining was performed as described for the tissue sections with or without the trypsin treatment.
